Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What is root? Briefly explain the regions or parts present in a typical root.
Ans. Root : The root is non-green, cylindrical descending part of the plant that normally grows
downwards into the soil. A typical root possesses five parts or regions:
(i) Root Cap: It is a thimble shaped or cap like, structure present at the tip of the root. It protects
the tender apex of the root as it makes its way through the soil.
(ii) Growing or meristematic zone : It lies above the root cap. The cells of this zone divide
actively and add new cells to root and root cap.
(iii) Zone of Elongation: It lies behind the meristematic zone. The cells of this region are newly
formed cells, which lose the power of division. These also possess the power of absorption of
water from the soil.
(iv) Zone of Root hair : It lies above the region of elongation and bears a clusters of very fine
tubular outgrowths called root hairs. This zone is also called the zone of differentiation because
different types of primary tissues mature in this region.
(v) Zone of Maturation : This region forms the major part of the root and no change occur in
this region. It forms the permanent zone of the root and also gives out lateral roots.
Q. 2. Describe with examples modifications of adventitious roots.
Ans. Modifications of Adventitious Roots:
(i) Tuberous: It is swollen root and shapeless occurring singly. e.g., Sweet potato.
(ii) Fasciculated: Several tuberous roots arise from the same place in a cluster. e.g, Dahlia,
Asparagus Ruellia.
(ii) Beaded roots: These roots have swollen parts at frequent intervals. eg., Portulaca,
Mormordica charantia and vitis.
(iv) Prop roots: These are pillar like roots, hanging vertically downward from the aerial branch
of the plants, e.g., Banyan tree.
(v) Stilt roots : The roots are short which grow obliquely from near the base of the main stem
and they provide anchorage and support to the stem. e.g., sugarcane, maize, Sorghum,
screwpine.
Q. 3. Define buds. What are the modification of buds ?
Ans. Buds: A bud is a compact under developed shoot having a growing point, surrounded by
closely placed immature leaves.

Modifications of buds:
(i) Bulbils: They are specialised buds, which become fleshy due to storage of food and take
part in vegetative reproduction. Bulbils may be axillary on the leaf, in place of flower on the floral
axis.
(ii) Tendrillar buds: Buds in some plants are modified into long threads, called tendrils. They
help the plant in climbing over some support. e.g., Cucurbita, Passiflora.
(iii) Bud thorns: In some plants, buds are modified into thorns to reduce transpiration and to
act as organs of defence against grazing, e.g., Duranta.
Q. 4. What is venation? Explain its types.
Ans. Venation: The arrangement of veins and veinlets in the lamina of a leaf is called venation.
The veins are not only the conducting channels for water, minerals and organic food, they also
provide firmness to the lamina and keep it expanded, They give rise to lateral veins, which
traverse the entire lamina.
Venation is of three types: Reticulate and parallel.
(i) Reticulate Venation: When the veinlets form a network, the venation is termed as reticulate
venation. E.g., leaves of dicot plants.
(ii) Parallel Venation: When the veins arising from mid rib or main veins, run parallel to each
other towards the margin or the apex of the lamina, venation is termed as parallel venation.
Present in the leaves of monocot plants. Parallel venation is of two sub-types:
(i) Pinnate or Unicostate parallel venation: The lamina has a single prominent vein or midrib
running from the base to the apex of lamina. e.g., Banana, Canna, etc.
(ii) Palmate or multicostate parallel venation: The lamina has several principal veins arising
from the base and running towards the apex or margin of the lamina.
Q. 5. Differentiate between:
(i) Prop roots and stilt roots
(ii) Tuberous root and Fasciculated roots
(iii) Respiratory and Assimilatory roots.
Ans. (i)
S. NO.

Prop roots

Stilt roots

(i)

Arise from horizontal aerial branches of a tree.

Arise from basal nodes of stem.

(ii)

Long and provide support to the plants like
pillars.
E.g., Banyan tree.

Short roots and grow downwards
obliquely to provide support to stem
like ropes of a tent.
E.g., Maize, jowar.

(ii)
S.NO.

Tuberous

Fasciculated roots

(i)

Modified tap or adventitious root.

Modified adventitious root.

(ii)

Occurs singly.

Occurs in groups.

(iii)

E.g., Mirabilis (tap root) and lpomea
(adventitious roots)

E.g., Asparagus and Dahlia

(iii)
S.NO.

Respiratory roots

Assimilatory roots

(i)
(ii)

Occurs in plants growing in swamps and
mangroves.
Non-green and non- photosynthetic.

Found in the plants growing in aquatic,
terrestrial and epiphytic habitats.
Green as well as photosynthetic.

(iii)

Bear lenticels for exchange of gases.

General body acts as organ gaseous
exchange.

Q. 6. What is a floral diagram ? What special features does a floral diagram inform?
Ans. A floral diagram is "the diagrammatic representation of the ground part of a flower
illustrating the number, arrangement and inter-relationship of various floral parts. The special
features, which a floral diagram provides, are:
(i) Symmetry of the flower.
(ii) Sex of the flower.
(iii) Bracts present or absent, bracteoles present or absent ; position of bracts and bracteoles in
relation to other floral parts;
(iv) Number of floral cyclic.
(v) Number of floral parts.
(vi) Position of odd sepal or odd petal, if the number of sepal or petal is odd.
(vii) Aestivation of sepals and petals.
(viii) Number of stamens arranged in one or more than one whorl, their position in relation to
petals, attachment of stamens with petals of free, adelphous condition, monothecous or
bithecous, extrose or introse.
(ix) Number of carpels, free or fused, number of locules, number of ovules in each locule, type
of placentation, any special feature.

(x) Position of floral parts in relation with the mother axis.
Q. 7. What do you understand by aestivation ? How many types of aestivation are found
?
Ans. Aestivation: The arrangement of sepals or petals with respect to one another in floral bud
is called ‘aestivation’
Types of aestivation :
(i) Valvate : The sepals or petals are arranged in a whorl which just touch one another at the
margin. They do not overlap. e.g., Acacia, Calotropis.
(ii) Twisted : In this type of aestivation, one margin of a sepal or petal overlaps the next sepal
or petal, and next margin is overlapped by the proceeding one resulting in a twisted
appearance. Overlapping is always in one direction. E.g. China rose (petals), Cotton and lady's
finger.
(iii) Imbricate: In this type of aestivation, the margins of sepals or petals overlap one another
but not in any definite direction. e.g., Cassia and gulmohur.
(iv) Vexillary: In this type of aestivation, the posterior petal is the largest and covers almost the
two lateral petals, and the latter in their tum, nearly overlap the two anterior or smallest petals
E.g., pea.
Q. 8. Give the structure of the maize grain.
Ans. (i) The maize grain is an endospermic seed
(ii) The internal structure of seed or grain is like monocotyledonous seed.
(iii) On the outside, there is a single covering representing fused pericarp or testa.
(iv) Inside, the grain is divided into two unequal portions: the endosperm and the embryo.
(v) The endosperm is the upper half of the grain which is laden with starch, but its outer layer
next to the grain coat, contains abundant protein. It is called aleurone layer.
(vi) The lower half of the grain is occupied by the embryo.
(vii) The embryo has single cotyledon attached to embryonal axis, called scutellum.
(viii) The portion of embryonal axis below the cotyledon is the radicle and the upper end of
embryonal a is the plumule, surrounded by a protective sheath called coleoptile.

Q. 9. Differentiate between Monadelphous, Syngenesious and Synandrous Stamens.
Ans
S. No

Monadelphous Stamens

Syngenesious Stamens

Synandrous Stamens

(i)

All the stamens of a flower are
fused in one bundle by their filaments only.

Anthers of all the stamens
are fused.

Anthers and filaments of
all the stamens are
fused.

(ii)

Staminal tube is formed around
the base of the pistil which may
extend to cover the style.
Anthers and upper part of the
Filaments are free.

Fused anthers make a
tube around the style.

Fused anthers and
filaments form a compact
mass.
No part of stamen is
free.

(iii)

Filaments of all the
stamens are free.

Q. 10. Briefly explain the diagnostic features of family Solanaceae.
Ans. Diagnostic features:
(i) Aerial plant parts are hairy.
(ii) Leaves alternate, becoming opposite in floral region.
(iii) Calyx 5, gamosepalous, persistent.
(iv) Corolla 5, gamopetalous.
(v) Stamens-polyandrous and epipetalous.
(vi) Gynoecium-bicarpellary syncarpous.
Q. 11. Write an account of various types of fruits.
Ans. Fruit : The ripened and matured ovary after fertilization is called 'fruit’.
(i) In some plants, the ovary and other floral parts may turn into fruit without fertilization. The
fruits without fertilization are called ‘Parthenocarpic fruit’ or ‘Seedless fruit’. E.g., Banana.
(ii) True and False fruits : The fruits which are developed from the fertilized ovary are called
true fruits. E.g., Pea, Maize, Wheat, etc.
(iii) The fruits developed from other non-essential parts of the flower (such as sepals, petals,
thalamus etc.) are called 'false fruit’ or ‘Pseudocarpic fruits’ E.g., apple (thalamus is edible).

Q. 12. Describe a dicot (gram seed) with a labelled diagram.
Ans.

The gram seed is light or dark brown in colour and conical pyriform in outline.
(i) The seed is covered by two seed coats; the outer testa and the inner tegmen.
(ii) The hilum is a scar on the seed coat through which the developing seeds are attached to
fruit.
(iii) Above the hilum is a small pore called the micropyle.
(iv) Within the seed coat is the embryo, consisting of an embryonal axis and two cotyledons.
(v) At the two ends of the embryonal axis the radicle and the plumule are present.
(vi) The stored food is present in the cotyledons and endosperm is absent. Seed is therefore nonendospermic.

