NCERT Book Solutions For Class 10 Geography Contemporary India – II Chapter 2 Forest and Wildlife Resources – Free PDF Download
According to the Revised term-wise CBSE Syllabus 2021-22, this chapter has been removed.
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 2 Forest and Wildlife Resources provides the answers to the exercises given in the Geography book – Contemporary India II. Most of the time, students find it difficult to get the answers to the exercises. So, to help them, we have provided the NCERT Class 10 Geography Solutions. Solutions are created exclusively for board exam students by keeping in mind the exam pattern and the latest syllabus. Studying through these solutions will surely help students to score high marks in the exam.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography (Contemporary India II) Chapter 2 – Forest and Wildlife Resources 
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 2 – Forest and Wildlife Resources
The solutions for Chapter 2 of Forest and Wildlife Resources are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 10 for other subjects.
Exercise Page No 22
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which of these statements is not a valid reason for the depletion of flora and fauna? 
(a) Agricultural expansion. 
(b) Large scale developmental projects. 
(c) Grazing and fuelwood collection. 
(d) Rapid industrialisation and urbanisation.
Answer:
Grazing and fuelwood collection
(ii) Which of the following conservation strategies do not directly involve community participation? 
(a) Joint forest management 
(b) Beej Bachao Andolan 
(c) Chipko Movement 
(d) Demarcation of Wildlife sanctuaries
Answer:
Demarcation of wildlife sanctuaries
2. Match the following animals with their category of existence.
Answer:
3. Match the following.
Answer:
4. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What is biodiversity? Why is biodiversity important for human lives? 
Answer:
Biodiversity is made up of various types of life forms found on earth. It is a measure of variation at the ecosystem, species and genetic level. Biodiversity is abundant in Tropical areas. Tropical areas cover 10 per cent of the earth surface, but they host 90% of the world species.
Contribution of biodiversity in human lives
(ii) How have human activities affected the depletion of flora and fauna? Explain
Answer:
5. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. 
(i) Describe how communities have conserved and protected forests and wildlife in India.
Answer:
Chipko Movement:
The famous Chipko movement in the Himalayas has not only successfully resisted deforestation in several areas but has also shown that community afforestation with indigenous species can be enormously successful.
Certain societies revere a particular tree which they have preserved from time immemorial. The Mundas and the Santhal of Chota Nagpur region worship mahua (Bassia latifolia) and kadamba (Anthocaphalus cadamba) trees. The tribals of Odisha and Bihar worship the tamarind (Tamarindus indica) and mango (Mangifera indica) trees during weddings. To many of us, peepal and banyan trees are considered sacred.
In Sariska Tiger Reserve, Rajasthan, villagers have fought against mining by citing the Wildlife Protection Act. In many areas, villagers themselves are protecting habitats and are explicitly rejecting government involvement. The inhabitants of five villages in the Alwar district of Rajasthan have declared 1,200 hectares of forest as the Bhairodev Dakav ‘Sonchuri’, declaring their own set of rules and regulations which do not allow hunting and are protecting the wildlife against any outside encroachments.
(ii) Write a note on good practices towards conserving forest and wildlife.
Answer:
In India, joint forest management (JFM) programme furnishes a good example of involving local communities in the management and restoration of degraded forests. The programme has been in formal existence since 1988 when the state of Odisha passed the first resolution for joint forest management. JFM depends on the formation of local (village) institutions that undertake protection activities mostly on degraded forest land managed by the forest department. In return, the members of these communities are entitled to intermediary benefits like non-timber forest produces and share in the timber harvested by ‘successful protection’. The clear lesson from the dynamics of both environmental destruction and reconstruction in India is that local communities everywhere have to be involved in some kind of natural resource management. But there is still a long way to go before local communities are at the centre stage in decision-making. Accept only those economic or developmental activities, that are people-centric, environment-friendly and economically rewarding.
Forest and Wildlife Resources Summary
The students will get to know about the following topics:
‘Contemporary India-II’ is an important book for Class 10 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 2Is the Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography important for the final exam?Yes, Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography is equally important as the other chapters for the annual exam. So, skipping up on this chapter by students can lead to low marks in the exam. Hence, students should thoroughly practice and revise the key topics of all the chapters regularly to ace the annual exam. Referring to these NCERT Solutions aid students to improve their conceptual knowledge and analysing abilities that are vital from the exam point of view.From Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography, what are the topics that students can learn?From Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography, students can learn about topics like –
Flora and Fauna in India
Different types of species
Conservation of Forest and wildlife in India
Project Tiger
Types and Distribution of Forest and Wildlife resources
Community and ConservationWhat are the contributions of biodiversity in human lives discussed in the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 2?The contributions of biodiversity in human lives discussed in the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 2 are –
Agriculture – Variety of Plant species meet our needs for food.
Their contribution to business and industry
Leisurely activities
Ecological services
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 2
Is the Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography important for the final exam?
From Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography, what are the topics that students can learn?
What are the contributions of biodiversity in human lives discussed in the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 2?
