NCERT Book Solutions For Class 10 Geography Contemporary India – II Chapter 5 Minerals and Energy Resources – CBSE Term II Free PDF Download
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 explains the various energy resources and minerals that are present in our environment. Questions in the CBSE Term II exams are asked from the NCERT book. So, it’s crucial that students must prepare the answers to the exercise questions from the best resource to score good marks. To help students in Social Science exam preparation, we have provided the NCERT Solutions Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 Minerals and Energy Resources. Studying through these solutions will also help them in understanding how much to write for a particular question, depending on its marks allocation. Thus, these NCERT Class 10 Solutions will help students to prepare effectively for their CBSE Term II exams.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography (Contemporary India II) Chapter 5 – Minerals and Energy Resources 
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 – Minerals and Energy Resources
The solutions for Chapter 5 of Minerals and Energy Resources are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 10 for other subjects.
 Page No. – 63
Exercises
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following minerals are formed by the decomposition of rocks, leaving a residual mass of weathered material?
(a) Coal (b) Bauxite (c ) Gold (d) Zinc
Solution: (b) Bauxite
(ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand, is the leading producer of which one of the following minerals?
(a) Bauxite (b) Mica (c ) Iron Ore (d) Copper
Solution: (b) Mica
(iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the strata of which of the following rocks?
(a) Sedimentary Rocks (b) Metamorphic Rocks
 (c ) Igneous Rocks (d) None of the above
Solution: (a) Sedimentary Rocks
(iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand?
(a) Oil (b) Uranium (c ) Thorium (d) Coal
Solution: (c ) Thorium
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words.
Solution:
a. Ferrous minerals are the metallic minerals containing iron. For e.g.- Iron ore, Manganese, Nickel, Cobalt etc.
While non-ferrous minerals are also metallic, but they do not contain iron. For e.g.- Manganese, Nickel, Cobalt etc.
b. Conventional sources of energy include firewood, cattle dung cake, coal, petroleum, natural gas and electricity (both hydel and thermal).
While non-conventional sources of energy are solar, wind, tidal, geothermal, biogas and atomic energy.
(ii) What is a mineral?
Solution:
Minerals can be defined as a homogenous, naturally occurring substances with a definable internal structure. Minerals are found in varied forms in nature, ranging from the hardest diamond to the softest talc.
(iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks?
Solution:
In igneous and metamorphic rocks, minerals can occur in the cracks, crevices, faults or joints. The smaller deposits are called veins, and the larger ones are called lodes.
(iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources?
Solution:
Mineral deposits form only one per cent of the earth’s crust. We need to conserve mineral resources because the geological processes of mineral formation are so slow that the rates of replenishment are very small in comparison to the current rate of consumption.
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe the distribution of coal in India
Solution:
In India, coal can be found in rock series of two main geological ages:
The major resources of Gondwana coal are located in:
Tertiary coal occurs in the northeastern states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland.
(ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India? 
Solution:
Solar Energy has a bright future in India because we are a tropical country with enormous possibilities of tapping solar energy. Solar energy is fast becoming popular in rural and remote areas. India’s largest solar power plant is located at Madhapur, near Bhuj, where solar energy is used to sterilise milk cans. It is expected that the use of solar energy will be able to minimise the dependence of rural households on firewood and dung cakes, which in turn will contribute to environmental conservation and adequate supply of manure in agriculture.
Solar energy is a non-conventional source of energy which is also renewable. Use of solar energy will not only be good for the environment, but it will also reduce our dependence on oil and gas.
Minerals and Energy Resources Summary
The students will get to know about the following topics:
‘Contemporary India-II’ is an important book for Class 10 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography?The main topics that students will learn in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography are:
What is a mineral
Mode of occurrence of minerals
Ferrous Minerals
Non-Ferrous Minerals
Non-metallic Minerals
Rock Minerals
Conservation of minerals
Energy Resources
Conventional sources of energy
Petroleum
Natural Gas
Electricity
Non-Conventional Sources of energy
Nuclear or Atomic Energy
Wind power
Solar Energy
Biogas
Conservation of Energy ResourcesHow can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 PDF online?You can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 PDF from the links provided at BYJU’S website. Students only need to register themselves with BYJU’S to download the solutions PDF for free. All the solutions are created by expert tutors having vast experience in their respective subject following the latest CBSE guidelines. Students wishing to obtain a better idea of answering the textbook questions can refer to the solutions PDF.Why should students opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 for reference?Students should opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 as it’s handy and easy to comprehend. Moreover, the solutions can be viewed online and downloaded in PDF for offline use by the students at no cost and without any time constraints. All the solutions are curated by subject experts at BYJU’S using simple language for the ease of learning. Neat explanations in paragraphs and using bulletins in the solutions help students learn answer presentation skills vital for exams.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5
What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography?
How can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 PDF online?
Why should students opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 5 for reference?
