NCERT Solutions Class 8 Geography Resources and Development Chapter 1 – Resources
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1 – Resources are provided here for students to study and score good marks in the exams. Anything that can be used to satisfy a need, from the water you drink to the electricity you use in your house and the rickshaw you used to get home from school, are all considered resources. All these objects have been used by you, so they have utility. Utility or usability is what makes an object or substance a resource. We have compiled here the NCERT Solutions to the exercises, which will be useful for school exams, as they are sourced from the NCERT textbooks.
These solutions are easy and accurate and will align your preparation with the questions asked in the examinations. NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1 – Resources, contain solutions to the exercises given in the Geography book – Resources and Development.  Students can refer to these NCERT Solutions and can achieve their desired goals.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography PDF below.
 NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography (Resources and Development) Chapter 1 Resources- Download Pdf here
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1 – Resources
1. Answer the following questions.
(i) Why are resources distributed unequally over the earth?
Answer: Earth has different topography, climate and altitude at different places. Difference in these factors has resulted in unequal distribution of resources over the earth. Also, all these factors are different from place to place on the earth. Moreover, the level of development and technological levels determine the distribution.
(ii) What is resource conservation?
Answer: Saving the resources for future generations is called conservation. It is the protection and ethical use of valuable resources such as minerals, water, trees, wildlife and others. Resource conservation basically focuses on maintaining the natural world in order to protect the sources of resources.
(iii) Why are human resources important?
Answer: Humans as a resource are important because they have the ability to extract value from all other resources. They can make the best use of nature to create more resources, as they have the knowledge, skill and technology to do so. Education and health help in making humans a valuable resource.
(iv) What is sustainable development?
Answer: Balancing the need to use resources and also conserving them for the future is called sustainable development. The future of our planet and its people is linked with our ability to maintain and preserve the life support system that nature provides. Sustainable development is when all renewable resources are used sustainably, the diversity of life on the earth is conserved, and the damage to the natural environmental system is minimised and saved for our future generations.
2. Tick the correct Answer
(i) Which one of the following does NOT make substance a resource?
Answer: 3 Quantity
(ii) Which one of the following is a human made resource?
Answer:1 Medicine to treat cancer
(iii) Complete the following statement:
Biotic resources are …………..
Answer:1 Derived from living things
Chapter 1 – Resources Summary
Chapter 1 of Resources and Development deals with various types of resources available for the existence on the earth.
Students will learn about human-made and natural resources and the current status of these resources.
The students will also get to know about the following topics:
Resources and Development is an important book for the Class 8 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Social Science is provided in the links. Students can refer and easily download the solutions available in the pdf format for free.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1Explain sustainable development as learnt in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography.According to Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography, sustainable development can be better understood as the balance between the need to use resources and conserving them for the future. In other words, sustainable development is when all renewable resources are used sustainably, the diversity of life on the earth is conserved, and the damage to the natural environmental system is minimised and saved for our future generations.What will students learn from the Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography?In Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography, students will mainly learn about the human-made, natural resources and the current status of these resources. Also, students will get to know about the following topics:
1. Types of resources
2. The need for conservation of resources
3. Human-made resources
To learn more about these topics in detail, students can refer to the NCERT Solutions created by subject experts at BYJU’S.List the merits of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1?The merits of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1 are:
1. The NCERT Solutions strictly adheres to the latest CBSE syllabus and guidelines.
2. Illustrations, diagrams and charts are included in the answers to aid visual learning.
3. All the solutions are available in PDFs that can be downloaded for free.
4. Fundamental Concepts are well explained in a simple and understandable language.
5. Most reliable reference guide for exam preparation of students.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1
Explain sustainable development as learnt in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography.
What will students learn from the Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography?
List the merits of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 1?
