Very Short Answer Questions
Q. 1. Define environmental psychology. Ans. Environmental psychology deals with issues pertaining to human environmental interaction. Q. 2. What is ecology? Ans. Ecology is the study of relationships between living beings and their environment. Q. 3. What do you understand by the term environment? Ans. The word ‘environment’ refers to all that is around us, literally everything that surrounds us including the physical, social, work and cultural environment. Q. 4. Differentiate between natural and built environment. Ans. Natural environment is part of nature untouched by human hand while environment created by human beings is called built environment. Cities, offices, bridges, roads, dams are examples of built environment. Q. 5. Explain minimalist perspective of human-environment relationship. [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. Minimalistic perspective assumes that physical environment has little or negligible influence on human behavior, health and well-being. Q. 6. Explain instrumental perspective of human-environment relationship. [CBSE Delhi 2014, 2015] Ans. According to Stokols, Instrumental perspective assumes that physical environment exists for the comfort and well-being of human beings. Q. 7. What is the spiritual perspective of human-environment relationship? [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. Spiritual perspective refers to the environment as something to be respected or valued rather than exploited.
Q. 8. Explain the term crowding. 2016]
[CBSE Delhi OR
State the features of experiencing crowding. 2013]
[CBSE (AI)
Ans. Crowding is the person’s reaction to the presence of a large number of persons within a particular area or apace. When this number goes beyond a certain level, it becomes an environmental stressor and causes stress to individuals in that situation. The experience of crowding causes a feeling of discomfort, loss or decrease in privacy, negative view of the space around the person and feeling of loss of control over social interaction. For example, 15 people squeezing on 4 seats in a railway compartment experience crowding but the same 15 people in a marriage party do not experience crowding. Q. 9. What is density? Ans. Density is the number of persons within the available space. For example, if there are fifteen persons trying to squeeze into four seats in a railway compartment, each person is likely to experience crowding while the same fifteen persons in a large hall do no experience crowding. Q. 10. What is crowding tolerance?
[CBSE Delhi 2011]
Ans. Crowding tolerance refers to the ability to mentally deal with a high density or crowded environment. For example, individuals growing up in a large family that lives in a small house develop more crowding tolerance than people who are used to only a few persons around them. Q. 11. What is competition tolerance? Ans. Competition tolerance is the ability is a situation in which individuals have to compete with others for even basic resources including physical space.
Q. 12. What is personal space?
[CBSE (AI) 2011]
Ans. Personal space is the comfortable physical space one generally likes to maintain around oneself. Personal space can vary between people, between situations and between cultures. Q. 13. What is aggression?
[CBSE (AI) 2012]
Ans. Aggression refers to behaviour that is intended to cause harm to others. It is demonstrated through harsh words or criticism or hostile feelings against others. For example, a bully slaps a new student in school to snatch his chocolate. Q. 14. What is poverty? Ans. Poverty is a condition in which there is a lack of necessities of life such as food, clothing and shelter in the context of unequal distribution of wealth in society. Q. 15. Differentiate between poverty and deprivation. Ans. Poverty refers to an actual shortage of resources necessary for living. Deprivation is a state of perceiving or thinking that one has got less than what one should have got. The situation of the poor is worsened if they also experience deprivation, in reality usually the poor also feel deprived. Q. 16. What is discrimination? Ans. Discrimination refers to behaviour due to prejudice, which makes a distinction between rich and the poor, favouring the rich and advantaged over the poor and the disadvantaged. Distinction is seen in matters of interaction, education and employment. Q. 17. State the frustration-aggression theory. Ans. People in frustrated situations show more aggression than those who are not frustrated. In an experiment children are frustrated by preventing them from getting attractive toys that are visible through a screen. These children are found to be more destructive than those children who are allowed to access the toys. Q. 18. What is Citizenship? Ans. A citizen is a participatory member of a political community. Citizenship is gained by meeting legal requirements of national, state or local government. A nation grants certain rights and privileges to its citizens. In return, citizens are expected to obey their country’s laws and defend it against its enemies. It thus involves active involvement in various social, political and cultural activities.
