Short Answer Questions – I
Q. 1. Describe the factors that facilitate group formation. OR State three conditions which facilitate group formation.
[CBSE (AI) 2015]
Ans. The following factors facilitate group formation: i.
ii.
iii.
Proximity: Repeated interactions with the same set of individuals give us a chance to know them and their interests and attitudes. Common interests, attitudes and background are important determinants of your liking for your group members. Similarity: When two people are similar, there is consistency and they start liking each other. For example, when two students in a class share the interest of playing cricket, they are likely to become friends. When we meet similar people, they reinforce and validate our opinions and values and thus we start liking them. For example, you feel watching TV is not good because it shows too much violence and when you meet someone with similar views, it validates your opinion and you start liking the person. Common motives and goals: When people have common motives or goals, they get together and form a group. For example, you want to teach children in a slum area and meet like-minded people who help you in achieving your goal.
Q. 2. Why do people behave according to the group norms? Ans. People behave according to the group norms because i. ii.
iii.
Norms provide information to members of a group about what is expected of them in specific situations. People feel uncomfortable if they are considered different from others. Behaving in a way that differs from the expected form of behaviour may lead to disapproval or dislike by others, which is a form of social punishment. Norm is seen as reflecting the views and beliefs of majority. Most people believe that the majority is more likely to be right than wrong.
Example of conformity: a rule is announced in school in banning mobile phones in school. You know that if you do not sign the letter you will lose many friends and get a bad name for keeping student unity. Hence you conform to the group norm by signing the letter, i.e., expectations of other group members so that you are not noticed as deviant. Q. 3. Differentiate between formal and informal groups.
Ans. i.
ii. iii.
he formation of formal groups is based on some specific rules or laws and members have definite roles. There is a set of norms which help in establishing order. On the other hand, formation of informal groups is not based on rules or laws. Relationship among members in formal groups is not close. On the other hand, there is a close relationship among members of an informal group. For example, a university is a formal group while family is an informal group.
Q. 4. Why do people conform? How is conformity different from compliance? Explain. [CBSE (AI) 2011] Ans. People conform because: i. ii. iii.
It allows people to function more smoothly by adhering to group norms. People behaving in a different way may lead to disapproval. The norm is seen as reflecting views and beliefs of the majority. Most people believe that the majority is more likely to be right.
Conformity means behaving according to the group norm while compliance is a response to a request made by someone. Example of conformity: a rule is announced in school in banning mobile phones in school. You agree to do so. A member of a community group for ‘Clean Environment’ requests you to put a sticker on your bike that reads, ‘Say no to Plastic bags’. You agree to do so. This is compliance. Q. 5. What are the techniques of compliance? Ans. The techniques of compliance are i.
ii.
iii.
Foot-in-the-door technique: A person begins with a small request and then a bigger request is made. For example, someone may offer a gift (something free) by a company and then with a request to buy a product made by the company. Deadline technique: A last date is announced until which a product or an offer is available. The aim is to make people ‘hurry’ and make the purchase before they miss the rare opportunity. It is more likely that people will buy a product under this deadline condition than if there is no such deadline. The door-in-the-face technique: In this you begin with a large request and when this is refused a smaller request is made, the one that was actually desired, which is usually granted by the person.
Q. 6. What are the determinants of a cooperation and competition? Ans. The determinants of a cooperation and competition are
i.
ii. iii.
Reward structure: Cooperative reward is one in which there is interdependence and reward is possible only if all contribute. A competitive reward structure is one in which one can get a reward only. Interpersonal communication: Good interpersonal communication facilitates cooperation which in turn facilitates interaction and discussion. Reciprocity: Cooperation may encourage more cooperation while competition produces more competition. For example, if someone has helped you in the pastyou are more likely to help him while on the other hand, if someone has refused to help you, you also might refuse to help him.
