Very Short Answer Questions
Q. 1. What is self? Ans. Self refers to the totality of an individual’s conscious experiences, ideas, thoughts and feelings with regard to himself or herself. For example, an adivasi or an Indian. A newly born child has no idea about his self. As a child grows older, the idea of self emerges and its formation begins. Parents, friends, teachers, etc., help in this. Our interaction with other people, our experiences, and the meaning we give to them, serve as the basis of our self. Q. 2. What is personal identity? Ans. Personal identity refers to those attributes of a person that make him or her different from others. For example, I am Sanjana or I am honest. Q. 3. Explain the term social identity. Ans. Social identity refers to those aspects of a person that link him or her to a social or cultural group. For example, he is a Hindu or an adivasi. Q. 4. Differentiate between self as a subject and self as an object. Ans. Self is described as a subject, who does something (e.g., I am a dancer) and as an object on which something is done (e.g., I am the one who easily gets hurt). Q. 5. What is ‘self-concept’? Ans. The way we perceive ourselves (as either positive or negative) and the ideas we hold about our competencies and attributes is called self-concept. For e.g., view of an individual’s academic talents. At a more specific level, a person may have positive viewof his athletic bravery but a negative view of academic talents. At an even more specific level, one may have a positive view about one’s reading ability but a negative one about one’s mathematical skills. Q. 6. What is ‘self-esteem’? Ans. The judgment a person makes about his value or worth is called self-esteem. It can be high or low. Children with high academic self-esteem perform better in school than those with low academic self-esteem. Children with high social self-esteem are moreliked by their peers than those with low social self-esteem. Q. 7. What are the characteristics of people with low self esteem? Ans. Children with low self-esteem display anxiety, depression and increasing antisocial behaviour.
Q. 8. What is ‘self-efficacy’? Ans. A person who believes that she/he has ability or behaviours required by a particular situation demonstrates high self-efficacy. A strong self-efficacy sense allows us to select, influence, and construct the circumstances of our life. Strong self-efficacy people are less fearful. Self-efficacy can be developed with the help of society, parents and our own positive experiences as they present positive models during formative years of childhood. The notion of self-efficacy is based on Bandura’s social learning theory. His initial studies showed that children and adults learned behaviour by observing and imitating others. People’s expectations of mastery or achievement and their convictions about their own effectiveness determine the type of behaviour they would engage in. The amount of risk they would undertake also determines this. For example, people with high self-efficacy stop smoking the moment they decide to do so. Q. 9. What is ‘self-regulation’? Ans. Self-regulation refers to our ability to organize and monitor our own behavior. People who can change their behavior according to demands of the external environment are high on self-monitoring. Resistance to situational pressures and control over ourselves is possible through will-power. Q. 10. What is self-control or delay of gratification? Ans. Learning to delay or defer the gratification of needs is called self-control. For example, fasting in vrata or roza. Q. 11. Define personality.
[CBSE (AI) 2013]
Ans. Personality refers to our characteristic ways of responding to individuals and situations. For example, a person who is socially active, assertive, talkative and funloving is an extravert personality. Personality refers to unique and relatively stable qualities that characterize an individual’s behaviour across different situations over a period of time. Consistency in behaviour, thought and emotion of an individual across situations and time-periods characterizes his/her personality. For example, an honest person is more likely to remain honest irrespective of time or situation. Q. 12. Describe any two factors from the 5-Factor Model of Personality. (Write any two) Ans. The Big Five Factors include: Openness to experience: Those who score high on this factor are imaginative, curious, open to new ideas, and interested in cultural pursuits. In contrast, those who score low are rigid. Extraversion: It characterizes people who are socially active, assertive, talkative and fun-loving. On its opposite are people who are shy.
Agreeableness: This factor characterises people who are helpful, co-operative, friendly, caring, and nurturing. On the opposite are people who are hostile and selfcentered. Neuroticism: People who score high on this factor are emotionally unstable, anxious, worried, fearful, distressed, irritable and hypertensive. On the opposite side are people who are well adjusted. Conscientiousness: Those who score high on this factor are achievement-oriented, dependable, responsible, prudent, hardworking and self-controlled. On the opposite are people who are impulsive. Q. 13. Give the characteristics of extroverts. Ans. Extroverts are sociable, outgoing, active, gregarious, impulsive, thrill-seeking, assertive, talkative, fun-loving, drawn to occupations that allow dealing directly with people and react to stress by trying to lose themselves among people and social activity. Q. 14. What are defence mechanisms? Ans. Human behaviour reflects an attempt to deal with or escape from anxiety. Freud described various defence mechanisms which people use to reduce anxiety by distorting reality. Q. 15. Explain the term ‘reaction formation’.
[CBSE Delhi 2014]
Ans. Reaction Formation is a type of defence mechanism in which a person defends against anxiety by adopting behaviours opposite to his or her true feelings. For e.g. a person with strong sexual urges channelises his or her energy into religious fervour. Q. 16. What is meant by structured personality tests? Ans. Structured personality tests require subjects to give responses using some kind of rating scale. The subject reports his/her feeling objectively with respect to various items. For example, self-report measures. Q. 17. Elaborate the Existential theory of personality. Ans. Existentialism emphasizes avoiding powerlessness, loneliness, emptiness, and inability to find meaning and value in our lives. This can be achieved by taking responsibility and by living genuine and authentic lives. Q. 18. What is assessment? Ans. Assessment refers to measurement of psychological attributes of individuals and their evaluation using scientific testing procedures.
Q. 19. Differentiate between formal and informal assessment. Ans. Formal assessment is objective, standardized and organized while informal assessment varies from case to case, from one assessor to another and is open to subjective interpretations. Q. 20. Explain any two methods used for psychological assessment. (Write any two) Ans. The methods for psychological assessment are: Self-report Measures: These are fairly structured measures, often based on theory, that require subjects to give verbal responses using some kind of rating scale. The method requires the subject to objectively report her/his own feelings with respect to various items. The responses are accepted at their face value. They are scored in quantitative terms and interpreted on the basis of norms developed for the test. Projective Techniques: Projective techniques were developed to assess unconscious motives and feelings. These techniques are based on the assumption that a less structured or unstructured stimulus or situation will allow the individual to project her/his feelings, desires and needs on to that situation. These projections are interpreted by experts. A variety of projective techniques have been developed; they use various kinds of stimulus materials and situations for assessing personality. Some of them require reporting associations with stimuli (e.g., words, inkblots), some involve story writing around pictures, some require sentence completions, some require expression through drawings. Interview: This involves seeking information from a person on a one-to-one basis. This can be structured or unstructured. For example, an employer selecting employees for his/her organization. Observation: This involves employing systematic, organized and objective procedures to record behavioural phenomenon occurring in a natural situation. This can be participant or non-participant in nature. E.g., observing mother-child interactions. Q. 21. What is naturalistic observation? Ans. Naturalistic observation is observation in a natural setting. For example, observing how people behave in response to a heavy discount provided by a shop. Q. 22. Explain participant observation. Ans. In participant observation, the observer may become part of the group being observed. In this the observer takes some time to establish a rapport with the group so that they start accepting him/her as one of the group members. E.g., a teacher may become a part with students playing in the play-ground.
Q. 23. Critically evaluate the method of behaviour rating for assessing personality. Ans. Behaviour ratings are used for assessment of personality in educational and industrial settings. In this individuals are put into certain categories in terms of their behavioural qualities. These ratings have drawbacks such as halo effect, middle category bias and extreme response bias. Q. 24. Describe nomination as a method of assessment. Ans. This method is used in obtaining peer assessment. In this each person is asked to choose one or more persons of the group with whom she/he would like to work, study, play or participate in a activity. The person may be asked to specify the reason for his or her choices. Q. 25. What are situational tests? Ans. The most commonly used test of this kind is the situational stress test. It involves a kind of role-playing in which a person performs a task with other persons who are noncooperative and interfering. Thus this test provides us with information about how a person behaves under stressful situations.
