Very Short Answer Questions
Q. 1. What is stress?
[CBSE (AI) 2012]
Ans. Stress is described as the pattern of responses an organism makes to stimulus event that disturbs the equilibrium and exceeds a person’s ability to cope. Stressors like noise, crowding, a bad relationship, daily commuting to school or office are events that cause our body to give the stress response. Q. 2. What do you mean by well-being? Ans. Well-being means to have positive health. Health is a state of complete physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being, and not merely the absence of disease. Q. 3. Identify any two human strengths which have been found by positive psychologists. Ans. i. ii.
Curiosity/Interest in the world: An openness to experience, flexibility about things that don’t fit your preconceptions. Love of Learning: Taking pleasure in learning new things, taking every opportunity to expand your knowledge and expertise.
Q. 4. Give the causes of environmental stress. Ans. Environmental stresses are caused by air pollution, crowding, noise, heat of the summer, winter cold or disasters such as fire, earthquake, floods etc. Q. 5. Explain the term ‘frustration’.
[CBSE Delhi 2016]
Ans. Frustration results from blocking of needs and motives while achieving a desired goal. Causes of frustration are social discrimination, interpersonal hurt or low grades in school. Q. 6. Explain the term ‘conflict’.
[CBSE (AI) 2016]
Ans. Conflicts occur between two or more incompatible needs or motives, e.g. whether to learn dance or study psychology. Q. 7. What do you mean by ‘burnout’? 2011]
[CBSE Delhi
Ans. The state of physical, emotional and psychological exhaustion is known as burnout.
Q. 8. What is psycho-neuro-immunology? Ans. Psycho-neuro-immunology focuses on the links between mind, brain and the immune system. It studies the effects of stress on the immune system. Q. 9. What is fight or flight response? Ans. i. ii.
Selye observed that animals exposed to stressors show a similar pattern of bodily response. He called this pattern General Adaptation Syndrome (GAS). The fight or flight response, also called as ‘acute stress response’ refers to a physiological reaction that occurs in the presence of something that is terrifying, either mentally or physically. The response is triggered by the release of hormones that prepare the body to deal with a threat or to run away to safety. The term ‘fight or flight’ represents the choices.
Q. 10. What is coping?
[CBSE (AI) 2011]
Ans. Coping is a dynamic situation-specific reaction to stress. E.g., watching TV, phone up a friend or try to be with other people. Q. 11. What is task-oriented coping? Ans. Task-oriented coping involves using alternate courses of action for coping. For example, scheduling your time better or using better methods to solve problems. Q. 12. Explain emotion-oriented coping strategy. [CBSE (AI) 2013] Ans. Emotion-oriented Strategy involves venting feelings of anger and frustration or deciding that nothing can be done to change things. For example, to stop worrying. Q. 13. Discuss avoidance-oriented strategy of coping. [CBSE Delhi 2015] Ans. Avoidance-oriented strategy involves denying or minimizing the seriousness of the situation. It involves conscious suppression of stressful thoughts and their replacement by self-protective thoughts. Examples of this are watching TV, phone up a friend or try to be with other people. Q. 14. Explain biofeedback. [CBSE Delhi 2014] Ans. Biofeedback is a type of Stress Management Techniques which involves three stages: developing an awareness of the particular physiological response, e.g. heart rate, learning ways of controlling that physiological response in quiet conditions; and transferring that control into the conditions of everyday life.
Q. 15. Explain the role of social support in promoting positive health and wellbeing. [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. Emotional support helps to overcome anxiety, loss of self-esteem by the availability of people on whom we can rely upon, those who love, care and value us. Social support reduces psychological distress, depression or anxiety during times of stress. It helps in promoting positive health and providing psychological well-being.
