Short Answer Questions – II Q. 1. Classify values giving examples. Ans. Values are classified in many categories or types such as physical, mental, emotional, economic, aesthetic, moral, religious, cultural and spiritual. For example, athletes give more importance to building strong muscles than others. Scholars show more concern towards the development of their mental faculties; and spend their time in search of new knowledge. Some people easily get emotionally aroused, while others show control over their emotions. There are persons who give more importance to the conservation of natural resources and show respect for natural beauty and habitat. Respecting the elders and behaving according to the norms of the group are more commonly observed in the Indian than the western people. Thus, people show different types of value preferences. Q. 2. What are Terminal and Instrumental Values? Ans. Values that are concerned with what you want to achieve in life such as wealth, freedom, happiness or peace are Terminal Values. Values that are concerned with what you do to attain the terminal values are Instrumental Values. For example, you want to become a wealthy person is a terminal value. How you earn this wealth – through honest means or through employing unfair means are instrumental values. Q. 3. Describe the role of parents and society in the development of values. Ans. I.
II.
III. IV.
Acquisition of values is a gradual process which becomes stable with age. Young children exhibit more frequent changes in their preferences like favourite friends, colours, games, animals, school subjects. These preferences become stabilized in older children or adults. Values or beliefs about what is right or wrong, are internalized by the child at a very early age through imitation and modeling of parents or significant others. Parents influence the development of values through rewards, punishments, use of discipline and teaching moral behaviour. Children learn about their culture, customs, rituals, manners, loyalties and prejudices of the group of which they are a part. Children learn to be obedient to their elders and nurture those younger to him.
Q. 4. What do you understand by value preferences? Ans. Western societies are individualistic societies which stress individual goals over the goals of the family, society or to the group to which they belong. They place greater emphasis on values such as self-reliance, self-sufficiency, privacy, individual achievement and freedom. On the other hand, Indian societies are interdependent with others in the family or the community to which they belong. They sacrifice their personal
goals for the benefit of group requirements. For example, they cancel going to a movie when someone is ill in the family and needs to be attended. Q. 5. State Gardner’s eight types of intelligences. Describe any one with the help of examples. [CBSE Delhi 2011; (AI) 2016] OR Mention Multiple Intelligences as suggested by Gardner. Explain logical mathematical intelligence. Ans. Howard Gardner described eight types of intelligence. They are as follows: I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII.
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V. VI.
Linguistic Logical-Mathematical Spatial Musical Bodily-Kinaesthetic Interpersonal Intrapersonal Naturalistic
Linguistic: It is the capacity to use language fluently and be sensitive to different shades of word meanings. This involves using language fluently and flexibly. Persons high on this intelligence are ‘word-smart’. Poets and writers are strong in this component of intelligence. Logical-Mathematical: This involves skills in scientific thinking and problem solving. People high on this type of intelligence can think logically and critically. They engage in abstract reasoning and can manipulate symbols to solve mathematical problems. Scientists and Nobel Prize winners are strong in this component. Spatial: It refers to the abilities involved in forming, using and transforming mental images. Pilots, sailors, sculptures, painters, architects, interior decorators andsurgeons are high in this type of intelligence. Musical: It is the capacity to produce, create and manipulate musical patterns. Persons high on this intelligence are sensitive to sounds and vibrations and in creating new patterns of sounds and rhythms. Bodily-Kinaesthetic: This involves using body flexibly and creatively. Athletes, dancers, actors, sportsperson, gymnasts and surgeons are high in this intelligence. Interpersonal: This is the skill of understanding the motives, feelings and behaviours of other people so as to bond into a comfortable relationship with others. Psychologists, counselors, social workers, religious leaders are high on this component.
VII.
VIII.
Intrapersonal: This refers to the knowledge of one’s internal strengths and limitations and awareness of one’s own feelings, motives and desires. This relates to human existence and finding meaning in one’s life. Philosophers and spiritual leaders are high on this intelligence. Naturalistic: This is recognizing the beauty of flora and fauna. Hunters, farmers, tourists, botanists, zoologists, bird watchers are high on this component. (Explain any one.)
Q. 6. Differentiate between ‘technological intelligence’ and integral intelligence.’ Elaborate the concept of intelligence in Indian tradition. OR Explain the competencies of Indian notion of intelligence. [CBSE (AI) 2015] Ans. Technological intelligence: I. II. III.
Promoted by technologically advanced societies. Fosters skills of generalization, abstraction, speed, minimal moves and mental manipulation. Focuses on attention, observation, analysis, performance and achievement (individualist orientation)
Integral intelligence: I. II. III. IV.
Promoted and valued in Asian and African societies. Fosters cognitive and non-cognitive skills and processes. Holistic perspective where emphasis is given to connectivity with social and world environment. Collectivistic orientation and self-reflection.
Intelligence in Indian concept I. II. III.
Talks of integral intelligence Buddhi Competencies
a) Cognitive capacity—sensitivity to problem solving and effective communication. b) Social competence—commitment to elders, concern for young and the needy and understanding others’ perspective. c) Emotional competence—self-regulation and self-monitoring of emotions, honesty, politeness, good conduct and self-evaluation.
d) Entrepreneurial competence—commitment, persistence, patience hard-work, vigilance and goal-directed behaviours. Q. 7. How is ‘aptitude’ different from ‘interest’ and ‘intelligence’? How is aptitude measured? [CBSE Delhi 2015; (AI) 2011, 2014] Ans. Aptitude is an individual’s capacity to acquire some specific knowledge or skill after training. For example, a person with high mechanical aptitude will be a successfulmechanical engineer. Intelligence is the global and aggregate capacity of an individual to think rationally, act purposefully and deal effectively with the environment. Interest is a preference for a particular activity. For example a person can have a strong interest in mathematics or science. Multiple Aptitude Tests exist in the form of test batteries which measure aptitude in separate areas. For example, DBDA (David’s Battery of Differential Abilities) measures aptitude in various areas such as Closure Ability, Clerical Ability, Numerical Ability, Psychomotor Ability, Reasoning Ability etc. Q. 8. How is creativity related to intelligence? 2015]
[CBSE (AI)
Ans. I.
II.
A certain level of intelligence is required for creativity but beyond that intelligence does not correlate with creativity. Creativity tests involve divergent thinking and assess such abilities such as ability to produce a variety of ideas i.e. ideas which are off-the-beaten-track, ability to see new relationships. It involves expression of spontaneous originality and imagination.Tests of intelligence involve convergent thinking. The person has to think of the right solution to the problem and the focus is on assessing abilities such as memory,logical reasoning, accuracy, perceptual ability and clear thinking. Creativity tests are open-ended. There are no specified answers to questions or problems in creativity tests. Individuals have freedom to use one’s imagination andexpress it in original ways.On the other hand, intelligence tests are closedended. There are fixed answers to questions.
Q. 9. What are the stages of creative thinking? Ans. The process of creative thinking takes place in the following stages: I.
Preparation stage: At this stage one understands the task or problem in hand, analyses the problem, becomes aware of the background facts and related information. The process evokes curiosity and excitement to think more and
II. III.
IV.
more in different directions. The person tries to look at the task or problem from different angles and viewpoints. Here, divergent thinking abilities play their role. Incubation stage: At this stage the individual is stuck and may get disgusted with failure and may leave the problem or the task for sometime. Illumination stage: At this stage the individual is not consciously thinking of the problem but seeking relaxation from conscious effort. Ideas may occur or strike when the person is doing something else, for example, going to sleep, waking up, taking a bath or just walking along. This stage is associated with the ‘Aha!’ or ‘I have found it” experience with the emergence of creative ideas. Verification: At this stage the worth or appropriateness of ideas or solutions are tested and judged. Here convergent thinking plays a role in selecting the appropriate idea or solution that works.
Q. 10. What are the barriers to creative thinking? Ans. There are blocks to creative thinking which fall into the following categories: I.
II. III.
IV.
Habitual: The tendency to be overpowered by habits particularly in one’s way of thinking can be detrimental to creative expression. We become so used to thinking in a familiar way that it becomes difficult to think in novel ways. It may be related to quickly jump to conclusions, not to see problems from fresh perspectives, be satisfied with routine patterns of doing things, or resist to overcome pre-conceived viewpoints and not to change immediate judgments. Perceptual: Perceptual blocks prevent us from being open to novel and original ideas. Motivational and emotional: These blocks such as lack of motivation, fear of failure, fear of being different, fear of ridicule or rejection, poor self-concept, negativism etc may hamper creative thinking. Cultural: These barriers are related to excessive adherence to traditions, expectations, conformity pressures and stereotypes. Excessive conformity to traditions, rituals and procedures are likely to block creative thinking.
