Short Answer Questions – I
Q. 1. What do you mean by transference neurosis? Describe its types. Ans. The client expresses his/her frustrations, anger, fear and depression that had been suppressed during the early childhood years. The therapist acts as the substitute for an authority figure and this stage is called transference neurosis. It is of two types: I. II.
Positive transference: When the client idolizes or falls in love with the therapist and seeks the therapist’s approval, positive transference takes place. Negative transference: When the client has feelings of hostility, anger and resentment towards the therapist negative transference occurs.
Q. 2. How is behaviour therapy used to treat phobia? Or Enumerate the steps in systematic desensitization. Ans. Systematic desensitization is a technique used in behaviour therapy introduced by Wolpe for treating phobias or irrational fears. The therapist prepares a hierarchy of anxiety-provoking stimuli with the least anxiety-provoking stimuli at the bottom of the hierarchy. The therapist relaxes the client and asks the client to think of the least anxiety-provoking situation. The client is asked to stop thinking of the fearful situation if the slightest tension is felt. Over sessions the client is able to imagine more severe fear provoking situations while maintaining the relaxation. The client gets systematically desensitized to the fear. The process of systematic desensitization is based on the principle of reciprocal inhibition which states that two mutually opposing forces inhibits the weaker force. Q. 3. Describe Rational Emotive Therapy. Ans. Psychological distress is caused by irrational thoughts and beliefs. The distorted perception of the antecedent event due to irrational beliefs leads to a consequence, i.e., negative emotions and behaviours. In the process of RET, the irrational beliefs are refuted by the therapist through the process of non-directive questioning. The nature of questioning is gentle, without probing or being directive. Q. 4. Discuss Cognitive therapy given by Albert Ellis. Ans. Albert Ellis formulated the Rational Emotive Therapy (RET) in which he states that the distorted perception of the antecedent event due to the irrational belief leads to a consequence, i.e., negative emotions and behaviours. Irrational beliefs are assessed through questionnaires and interviews and are refuted by the therapist through nondirective questioning. The nature of questioning is gentle without probing or being directive. The questions make the client to think deeper into his/her assumptions about life and problems. Gradually the client is able to change
the irrational beliefs by making a change in his/her philosophy about life. The rational belief system replaces the irrational belief system and there is reduction in psychological distress. Q. 5. Discuss cognitive therapy given by Aaron Beck. OR How is Rational Emotive Therapy (RET) used in treating psychological disorders? [CBSE (AI) 2011] OR Explain with examples that how cognitive distortions take place. [CBSE (AI) 2015] Ans. Aaron Beck states that childhood experiences provided by family and society develop core schemas or systems. For example, a client, who was neglected by the parents as a child, develops the core schema ‘I am not wanted’. During the course of life, a critical incident occurs in his/her life. S/he is publicly ridiculed by the teacher in school. The critical incident triggers the core schema of ‘I am not wanted’ leading to the development of negative automatic thoughts. These negative thoughts lead to cognitive distortions such as ‘I am ugly’, ‘I am stupid’, ‘Nobody loves me’ which are called dysfunctional cognitive structures. Repeated occurrence of these thoughts leads to development of feelings of anxiety and depression. The therapist uses gentle, nonthreatening questioning by which the client thinks in the direction opposite to negative automatic thoughts and gains insight of his dysfunctional schemas and achieves cognitive restructuring which reduces anxiety and depression. Q. 6. Mention the therapy that encourages the client to seek personal growth and actualise their potential. Give its salient features. The humanistic-existential therapies encourage personal growth and actualise the potential by expanding the client’s awareness. The therapist is merely facilitator and guide. It is the client who is responsible for the success of the therapy by the process of self-growth through which healing takes place. The therapy creates a permissive, non-judgmental and accepting atmosphere in which the client’s emotions can be freely expressed and the complexity, balance and integration could be achieved. The fundamental assumption is that the client has the freedom and responsibility to control his/her own behaviour. Q. 7. What is the meaning of ‘Logotherapy’?
[CBSE Delhi 2016]
Ans. Neurotic anxieties arise when problems of life are attached to the physical, psychological and spiritual aspects of one’s existence. Victor Frankl emphasized the role of spiritual anxieties in leading to meaninglessness and hence is called existential anxiety, i.e. neurotic anxiety of spiritual origin. The goal of logotherapy is to help the patients find meaning and responsibility in
their life irrespective of life circumstances. Transference is actively discouraged and the client finds meaning of his existence Q. 8. Describe client-centred therapy Ans. Client-centred therapy was given by Carl Rogers. The therapy provides a warm relationship in which therapist shows empathy, i.e., understanding the client’s experience as if it were his/her own and shows unconditional positive regard i.e. total acceptance of the client as s/he is. Unconditional warmth ensures that the client feels secure and trusts the therapist. The therapist reflects the feelings of the client in a non-judgmental manner. The reflection is achieved by rephrasing the statements of the client i.e. seeking simple clarifications to enhance the meaning of the client’s statements. The therapy helps a client to become his/her self with the therapist working as a facilitator. Q. 9. Discuss Gestalt therapy.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans. The goal of Gestalt therapy is to increase an individual’s self-awareness and selfacceptance. The client is taught to recognize his emotions that are being blocked outfrom awareness. Q. 10. Describe the Biomedical therapy. Ans. Medicines are prescribed by psychiatrists to treat psychological disorders. They are doctors specialized in the understanding, diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders. Severe mental disorders such as Schizophrenia or Bipolar disorders require antipsychotic drugs. Mental disorders such as Generalised Anxiety and Depression require milder drugs. The medicines prescribed to treat mental disorders can cause side-effects which need to be understood and monitored. Hence it is essential that medication is given under proper medical supervision. Electro-convulsive therapy (ECT) is another form of biomedical therapy. Mild electric shock is given via electrodes to the brain of the patient to induce convulsions. ECT is given when drugs are not effective in controlling the symptoms of the patient. Q. 11. Describe the rehabilitation of the mentally ill.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans. The aim during the treatment of psychological disorders is to reduce the symptoms and improve the functioning or quality of life. Rehabilitation is required to help patients to become self-sufficient. In rehabilitation, the patients are given occupational therapy, social skills training and vocational therapy. In occupational therapy, the patients are taught skills such as candle making, paper bag making and weaving to help them to form a work discipline. Social skills training helps the patients to develop interpersonal skills through role-play, imitation and instruction. The objective is to teach the patient to function in a social group. Cognitive retraining is given to improve the basic cognitive functions of attention, memory and executive functions. After the patient improves sufficiently, vocational training is given wherein the patient is helped to gain skills to undertake productive employment. Q. 12. Explain the concept of ‘unconditional positive regard’.
Ans. The therapist conveys by her/his words and behaviours that s/he is not judging the client and will continue to show the same positive feelings towards the client even if the client is rude or confides all ‘wrong’ things that s/he may have done or thought about. This is the unconditional positive regard which the therapist has for the client. The therapist has empathy for the client. i. ii. iii. iv.
The therapist shows positive warmth and is not dependent on what the client reveals. The therapist shows a non-judgmental attitude. The client feels secure and trusts the therapist. It facilitates the process of reflection. (seeking simple clarifications from the client to enhance understanding)
