Very Short Answer Questions
Q. 1. What are norms? Ans. Each society has norms, which are stated or unstated rules for proper conduct. Behaviours, thoughts and emotions that break societal norms are called abnormal. Q. 2. What is stigma? Ans. Stigma attached to mental illness means that people are hesitant to consult a doctor or psychologist because they are ashamed of their problems. Q. 3. What is meant by well-being?
[CBSE Delhi 2011]
Ans. Well-being means to have positive health. Health is a state of complete physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being, and not merely the absence of disease. Q. 4. What is exorcism? Ans. Exorcism is removing the evil that resides in the individual through counter-magic and prayer. Q. 5. What is interactional approach of psychological disorders? [CBSE (AI) 2013] Ans. In interactional or bio-psycho-social approach, all three factors, viz. biological, psychological and social play important roles in psychological disorders. The biological describes that defects in various body and brain processes are linked to many types of maladaptive behavior. The psychological approach describes that the psychological problems are caused by inadequacies in the way an individual thinks, feels or perceives the world. According to the social approach, psychological conflicts and disturbed interpersonal relationships were the causes of abnormal behavior. Q. 6. Why do we classify Psychological Disorders? Ans. Classifications of Psychological Disorders are useful because they enable users like psychologists, psychiatrists and social workers to communicate with each other about the disorder and help in understanding the causes of the disorders and the processesinvolved in their development and maintenance. Q. 7. How does humanistic existential model explain psychological disorders? [CBSE (AI) 2015] Ans. Humanists believe that human beings are born with a natural tendency to be friendly, cooperative and constructive and are driven to self-actualise, i.e. to fulfill this potential for goodness and growth. They further believe that from birth we have total
freedom to give meaning to our existence or avoid that responsibility. Those who shrink from this responsibility live empty, inauthentic and dysfunctional lives. Q. 8. What is Generalised Anxiety Disorder? Ans. Generalised Anxiety Disorder consists of prolonged, vague, unexplained and intense fears that are not attached to any particular object. The symptoms include worry and apprehensive feelings about the future, hyper-vigilance, which involves constantlyscanning the environment for dangers. In this the person is unable to relax, is restless, visibly shaky and tense. Q. 9. What is Panic Disorder? Ans. Panic Disorder involves constant anxiety attacks in which the person experiences terror. The clinical features include shortness of breath, dizziness, trembling, palpitations, choking nausea, chest pain or discomfort, fear of going crazy, losing control or dying. Q. 10. Explain the term ‘phobias’. 2012]
[CBSE (AI)
Ans. People with Phobias have irrational fears related to specific objects, people or situations. For example, irrational fears such as intense fear of a certain type of animal or if being in an enclosed space. Q. 11. Explain Separation Anxiety Disorder (SAD).
[CBSE (AI) 2013]
Ans. Separation Anxiety Disorder (SAD) is an internalising disorder unique to children where the child expresses excessive anxiety or panic at being separated from their parents. Symptoms are: The children have difficulty being in a room by themselves, going to school alone, are fearful of entering new situations, and cling to and shadow their parents’ every move. They may fuss, scream, throw severe tantrums or make suicidal gestures. Q. 12. Distinguish between Obsessive and Compulsive behaviour giving examples. [CBSE Delhi 2014] Ans. Obsessive Behaviour is the inability to stop thinking about a particular idea or topic. The person involved, often finds these thoughts to be unpleasant and shameful. Compulsive behaviour is the need to perform certain behaviours over and over again. It involves acts such as counting, ordering, checking, touching and washing. Q. 13. What is Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder?
[CBSE (AI) 2011, 2012]
Ans. People who have been caught in a natural disaster such as tsunami or have been victims of bomb blasts by terrorists, or been in a serious accident or in a war-related situation experience Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). PTSD symptoms include recurrentdreams, flashbacks, impaired concentration and emotional numbing.
Q. 14. Explain the term ‘anorexia nervosa’. Ans. In this the individuals have a distorted body image and consider themselves as overweight. They refuse to eat especially In front of others, exercise compulsively and lose large amounts of weight and even starve themselves to death. Q. 15. Differentiate between externalising and internalising disorders of childhood. Ans. Externalising Disorders include behaviours that are disruptive, aggressive and aversive to others in the child’s environment while Internalising Disorders are those conditions where the child experiences depression, anxiety and discomfort. Q. 16. What are Delusions? Ans. Delusions are false beliefs held on inadequate grounds. For example, delusions of grandeur in this people believe themselves to be specially empowered persons.
