Very Short Answer Questions
Q. 1. Define attitude. Ans. An attitude is a set of views or opinions which have an evaluative feature (positive, negative or neutral quality) and is accompanied by ABC components namely affective, behavioural and cognitive components. For example, a positive attitude of students towards teachers and parents. Q. 2. What is belief? Ans. Beliefs refer to the cognitive component of attitudes such as belief in or belief in democracy Q. 3. What are values? Ans. alues are attitudes with a ‘should’ or ‘ought’ aspect, i.e., moral or ethical values. For example, one should work hard or one should be honest. Q. 4. What is a stereotype? Ans. A stereotype is a cluster of ideas regarding the characteristics of a specific group. They are category-based schemas about a group of people. For example, a stereotype that Americans are hardworking. Q. 5. Explain the concept of prejudice. Ans. Prejudices are negative attitudes towards a particular group and are based on stereotypes (the cognitive component). The cognitive component of prejudice is accompanied by dislike or hatred (the affective component). Prejudice gets translated into discrimination (the behavioural component) whereby people behave in less positive way towards a particular target group compared to another group which they favour. In our society there has been cases of discrimination due to prejudice based on gender, religion, community, caste, physical handicap and illness such as AIDS. Q. 6. What is cognition? Ans. Cognition refers to all those mental processes that deal with obtaining and processing of information. Q. 7. What is social cognition? Ans. Social cognition refers to all those psychological processes that deal with the gathering and processing of information related to social objects. For example, a teacher’sconclusions regarding a student’s behavior in school are quite different from his mother’s conclusion who observes him at home.
Q. 8. What is schema? Ans. Schemas that function in the form of categories are called prototypes. They are the entire set of features or qualities that help us to define an object clearly. Q. 9. What is a prototype? Ans. Schemas that function in the form of categories are called prototypes. They are the entire set of features or qualities that help us to define an object clearly Q. 10. What is primacy effect? Ans. During formation of impression, information presented first has a stronger effect than information presented at the end. This is primacy effect. Q. 11. What is recency effect? Ans. During formation of impression, information that comes at the end may have stronger influence. This is recency effect. Q. 12. What is halo effect? Ans. During formation of impression, we have a tendency to think that a target person who has one set of positive qualities must have other positive qualities. This is known as halo effect. For example, if we are told that a person is ‘tidy’ and ‘punctual’, we are likely to think that the person must also be ‘hardworking’. Q. 13. What is social facilitation? Ans. Improvement in performance in the presence of others is called social facilitation. For example, cyclists racing with each other perform better than when they cycle alone. Q. 14. What is social inhibition? Ans. Decline in performance in the presence of others is called social inhibition. For example, if you recite a poem to an audience, your performance is inhibited than when you recite it to your teacher. Q. 15. Explain pro-social behaviour. Ans. Pro-social behavior or altruism is doing something or thinking about the welfare of others without any self-interest. For example, sharing things, cooperating with others,helping during natural calamities, showing sympathy, doing favours to others.
