Long Answer Questions
Q. 1. Explain the nature of stress giving examples. Discuss avoidance-oriented strategy of coping. [CBSE (AI) 2015] OR Explain the nature of stress giving examples. 2015]
[CBSE Delhi
Ans. Nature of Stress: The term ‘stress’ has been originated from the Latin word Strictus, meaning tight or narrow. Stress is described as the pattern of responses an organism makes to stimulus event that disturbs the equilibrium and exceeds a person’s ability to cope. Stressors like noise, crowding, a bad relationship, daily commuting to school or office are events that cause our body to give the stress response. Eustress describes the level of stress that is good and positive and is one of a person’s best assets for achieving peak performance and managing minor crisis. Distress is the manifestation of stress that causes our body’s wear and tear. It produces unpleasant effects, hampers our productivity, emotionally upsets us and causes our performance to deteriorate. Stress is often explained in terms of characteristics of the environment that are disruptive to the individual. Stressors are events that cause our body to give the stress response. Such events include noise, crowding, a bad relationship, or the daily commuting to school or office. The reaction to external stressors is called ‘strain’. OR Lazarus has distinguished between two types of appraisal, i.e. primary and secondary. The perception of stress is dependent upon the individual’s cognitive appraisal which is of two types, primary and secondary. Primary appraisal refers to the perception of a new or changing environment as positive, neutral or negative in its consequences. Negative events are appraised for their possible harm, threat or challenge. Harm is the assessment of the damage that has already been done by the event. Threat is the assessment of the possible future damage that may be brought about by the event. Challenge is associated with expectations of the ability to cope with the stressful event. Secondary appraisal is the assessment of one’s coping abilities and resources and whether they will be sufficient to meet the harm, threat or challenge of the event.
Selye observed that animals exposed to stressors show a similar pattern of bodily response. He called this pattern General Adaptation Syndrome (GAS). According tohim GAS involves three stages Alarm reaction, Resistance Stage and Exhaustion stage. Coping is a dynamic situation-specific reaction to stress. E.g. watching TV, phone up a friend or try to be with other people. Avoidance-oriented strategy: This involves denying or minimizing the seriousness of the situation. It involves conscious suppression of stressful thoughts and their replacement by self-protective thoughts. Examples of this are watching TV, phone up a friend or try to be with other people. Q. 2. Distinguish between eustress and distress giving suitable examples. Discuss the different sources of psychological stress. [CBSE (AI) 2015] OR What are the sources of stress? 2014]
[CBSE (AI)
Ans. Eustress describes the level of stress that is good and positive and is one of a person’s best assets for achieving peak performance and managing minor crisis. Distress is the manifestation of stress that causes our body’s wear and tear. It produces unpleasant effects, hampers our productivity, emotionally upsets us and causes our performance to deteriorate. The various sources of stress are: i. ii.
iii.
Life Events: Changes due to life events such as moving into a new house, break-up of a long-term relationship cause stress. Hassles: Happenings in our daily lives such as noisy surroundings, commuting, quarrelsome neighbours, electricity and water shortage, traffic snarls cause stress. Attending to various emergencies are daily hassles experienced by a housewife. Traumatic Events: Effects of extreme events such as fire, train or road accid robbery, earthquake, tsunami persist as symptoms of anxiety, flashbacks, dreams and intrusive thoughts. Severe trauma can also strain relationships or can lead to disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Q. 3. Describe the techniques that can help manage stress in life. [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. Some of the Stress Management Techniques are described as follows: i.
Relaxation Techniques: Reduces symptoms of stress and incidence of illness such as high blood pressure and heart diseases. Deep breathing and muscle
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
relaxation is used to relax the mind and body which starts from the lower part of the body and progresses up to the facial muscles. Meditation Procedures: This technique refocuses the attention that brings about an altered state of consciousness. This is possible through concentration so that the mediator is unaware of any outside stimulation. Biofeedback: This involves three stages: developing an awareness of the particular physiological response, e.g. heart rate, learning ways of controlling that physiological response in quiet conditions; and transferring that control into the conditions of everyday life. Creative Visualisation: This involves imagery and imagination for keeping one’s mind quiet, body relaxed and eyes closed. This reduces the risk of interference from unhidden thoughts and provides the creative energy needed for turning an imagined scene into reality. Cognitive Behavioural Techniques: This approach involves replacing negative and irrational thoughts with positive and rational ones. It includes assessment, stress reduction techniques, and application and follow-through. Assessment involves discussing the nature of the problem and seeing it from the viewpoint of the client. Stress reduction involves learning the techniques of reducing stress such as relaxation and self-instruction. Exercise: Regular exercise improves the efficiency of the heart, enhances the function of the lungs, maintains good circulation, lowers blood pressure, reduces fat in the blood and improves the body’s immune system. Swimming, walking, running, cycling, skipping help to reduce stress.
Q. 4. Describe the life skills which help in meeting the challenges of school life. OR How life skills enable individuals to deal effectively with stressful experiences of life? Ans. Life skills are the abilities for adaptive and positive behaviour that enable individuals to deal effectively with the demands and challenges of everyday life. They are described below: i.
ii.
Assertiveness: Assertiveness is a behaviour or skill that helps to communicate our feelings, needs, wants and thoughts, clearly and confidently. It is the ability to say no to a request, to state an opinion without being self-conscious, or to express emotions such as love, anger openly. An assertive person feels confident, has high self-esteem and a solid sense of his identity. Time Management: Managing time helps to relieve pressure, organizing our life and thus leading a balanced life. Learning to plan and delegate responsibilitieshelps to relieve pressure. It requires one to be realistic, deciding on the task to be done and organizing your life.
iii.
iv.
v. vi.
Rational Thinking: This involves challenging your distorted thinking and irrational beliefs, driving out potentially intrusive negative anxiety-provoking thoughts and making positive statements. Improving Relationships: This involves listening to what the other person is saying, expressing how you feel and what you think and accepting the other person’s opinions and feelings even if they are different from your own. Self-care: This involves keeping ourselves healthy and relaxed which prepares us physically and emotionally to tackle the stresses of everyday life. Overcoming Unhelpful Habits: This involves overcoming unhelpful habits such as perfectionism, avoidance or procrastination. Perfectionists are persons who want everything to be just right, find it difficult to relax, are critical of self and others. Avoidance is to put the issue under the carpet and refuse to accept or face it. Procrastination means putting off what we need to do and to be done at a later hour. It involves deliberately avoiding and confronting fears of failure or rejection.
