Long Answer Questions
Q. 1. Why do people join groups? Ans. People join groups because they satisfy a range of needs: i.
ii.
iii. iv. v. vi.
Security: When we are alone we feel insecure. Groups reduce this insecurity. Being with people gives a sense of comfort and protection. As a result, people feel stronger and less vulnerable to threats. Status: People feel recognised, important and experience a sense of power. For example, your school wins in inter-school debate, you feel proud and think that you are better than others. Self-esteem: Groups provide feelings of self-worth and give positive social identity. Being a member of a prestigious group enhances one’s self-concept. Satisfaction of psychological and social needs: Groups satisfy needs of belongingness, giving and receiving attention, love etc. Goal achievement: Groups help in achieving such goals which cannot be attained individually. There is power in the majority. Provide knowledge and information: Group membership provides knowledge and information that broadens our view.
Q. 2. What is a group? Explain the stages of group formation giving examples. [CBSE Delhi 2011; (AI) 2011] OR Explain giving examples the stages of group formation.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
OR Discuss the Tuckman’s stage model in detail. Ans. A group is defined as an organized system of two or more individuals who are interacting and interdependent, who have common motives, have a set of role relationships and norms that regulate their behaviour. Example: family, class, playgroup. The following are the stages of a group: i.
ii.
Forming Stage: When group members first meet, there is a great deal of uncertainty about the group, the goal and how it is to be achieved. There is excitement and apprehension. This stage is called the forming stage. Storming Stage: In this stage, there is conflict among members about how the target of the group is to be achieved, who is to control the group and its resources, and who is to perform what task.When this stage is complete, some
iii. iv.
v.
sort of hierarchy of leadership in the group develops and a clear vision as to how to achieve the group goal. Norming Stage: Group members by this time develop norms related to group behaviour. This leads to development of positive group identity. Performing Stage: By this time, the structure of the group has evolved. The group moves towards achieving the group goal.For some groups, this is the last stage of group development. Adjourning Stage: For some groups this is the last stage like in the case of an organizing committee for a school function. In this stage, once the function is over, the group may be disbanded.For example, during an annual function in a school, groups are formed consisting of the various participants and when the programme is over the group is dismantled.
Q. 3. Give one incident of social loafing in school. Why does it happen? Give the ways of reducing social loafing. OR How can social loafing be reduced in group work?
[CBSE AI 2015]
Ans. Individuals work less hard in a group than they do when performing alone. This phenomenon is referred to as social loafing. Social loafing is a reduction in individual effort when working on a collective task. This occurs because: i. ii. iii. iv. v.
Group members feel less responsible for the overall task being performed and therefore exert less effort. Motivation of members decreases because they realize that their contribution will not be evaluated on individual basis. The performance of the group is not compared with other groups. There is improper coordination among members. Belonging to the same group is not important for members.
For example, students competing in a game of tug-of-war. Similarly, in an experiment, a group of people were asked to clap or cheer as loudly as possible. Results showed that the amount of nose produced by each participant dropped as the size of the group decreased. It is possible to identify how much force each member of the team has been exerting. Such situations give opportunities to group members to relax and become a free rider. The various ways of reducing social loafing: i. ii. iii. iv.
Making the efforts of each person identifiable. Increasing the pressure to work hard. Increasing the apparent importance or value of a task. Making people feel that their individual contribution is important.
v.
Strengthening group cohesiveness which increases the motivation for successful group outcome.
Q. 4. Why do people conform? Explain how conformity is different from compliance. [CBSE Delhi 2011] People conform because: i. ii. iii.
It allows people to function more smoothly by adhering to group norms. People behaving in a different way may lead to disapproval. The norm is seen as reflecting views and beliefs of the majority. Most people believe that the majority is more likely to be right.
Conformity means behaving according to the group norm while compliance is a response to a request made by someone. Example of conformity: a rule is announced in school in banning mobile phones in school. You agree to do so. A member of a community group for ‘Clean Environment’ requests you to put a sticker on your bike that reads, ‘Say no to Plastic bags’. You agree to do so. This is compliance. Conformity takes place due to normative or informational influences whereas compliance is obtained by using any of these techniques Foot-in-the-door technique, Deadline technique or The door-in-the-face technique. Q. 5. What is conflict? What are the potential causes of inter-group conflict? [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. Conflict is a process in which either an individual or a group perceives that others have opposing interests, and both try to contradict each other. There is an intense ‘we’ or ‘they’ feeling. Causes of inter-group conflict are i. ii.
iii.
iv.
v. vi.
Lack of communication: Faulty communication leads to suspicion and a lack of trust. Relative deprivation: It arises due to comparison when members of a group feel that they do not have what they desire to have or are not doing well in comparison to other groups. Hence, they feel deprived and discontented. Belief of being superior from the other: It occurs when one party believes it is better than the other and every member wants to respect the norms of his/her group. Disrespect for the norms of the other group: A feeling that the other group does not respect the norms of my group, and violates them because of malevolent intent leads to inter-group conflict. Desire for Retaliation: Some harm done by the group in the past could be the reason for inter-group conflict. Biased perception: Feelings of ‘they’ and ‘we’ leads to biased perceptions.
vii.
Existence of a group: Groups obviously generate the feeling of competition and people become more aggressive when they are in a group than when they are alone.Groups compete over scarce resources, both material resources such as territory or money and social resources such as respect or self-esteem. Perceived inequity: Perceived inequity is a reason for conflict. Equity refers to distribution of rewards in proposition to individual contributions. If both contribute more but get less, you feel irritated.
viii.
Q. 6. What are the consequences of Inter-group conflict? i. ii.
iii.
Conflicts between groups lead to group polarisation. Conflicts may result in coalition formation of like-minded parties, thereby increasing the apprehensions of both parties resulting in mis-perceptions and biasedinterpretations and attributions. Conflicts can be at three levels; structural, group and individual. Structural conditions include high rates of poverty, economic and social stratification, inequality, limited social and political opportunity. Group level factors has shown that social identity, realistic conflict between group over resources and unequal power relations between groups lead to escalation of conflict. At the individual level; beliefs, biased attitudes and personality characteristics are important determinants.
According to Deutsch, the various direct or indirect consequences of inter-group conflict are: i. • • ii. iii.
iv. • • • •
Breakdown of communication in which Communication between the groups becomes poor. The group members do not trust each other, thereby leading to a breakdown in communication and this generates suspicion for each other. Distorted perception: Groups start magnifying their differences and start perceiving their behaviour as fair and others’ behaviour as unfair. Increase in power: Each side tries to increase its own power and legitimacy. As a consequence, the conflict gets escalated shifting from few specific issues to much larger issues. Escalation of conflict: Once conflict starts, several other factors lead to escalation of conflict such as the following: Hardening of in-group opinion. Explicit threats directed at the out-group. Each group retaliating more and more. Other parties also choose to take sides.
