Short Answer Questions – II
Q. 1. What are the goals of psychotherapy? Ans. All psychotherapies aim at the following goals: i. ii. iii. iv. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x.
Reinforcing client’s resolve for betterment Lessening emotional pressure Unfolding the potential for positive growth Modifying habits Changing thinking patterns Increasing self-awareness Improving interpersonal relations and communication Facilitating decision making Becoming aware of one’s choices in life Relating to one’s social environment in a more creative and self-aware manner.
Q. 2. State four characteristics of psychotherapeutic approaches. [CBSE (AI) 2015] Ans. All psychotherapeutic approaches have the following characteristics: i. ii.
iii. iv.
There is systematic application of principles underlying the different theories of therapy, Persons who have received practical training under expert supervision can practice psychotherapy, and not everybody. An untrained person may unintentionally cause more harm than any good, The therapeutic situation involves a therapist and a client who seeks and receives help for his/her emotional problems, The interaction of these two persons – the therapist and the client – results in the consolidation or formation of the therapeutic relationship. This is a confidential,interpersonal and dynamic relationship. This human relationship is central to any sort of psychological therapy and is the vehicle for change.
Q. 3. Explain ‘negative reinforcement’ and ‘aversive conditioning’ techniques of behaviour modification. [CBSE Delhi 2011] Ans. Negative reinforcement refers to following an undesired response with an outcome that is painful or not liked. For example, the teacher reprimands a child who shouts in class. Aversive conditioning refers to repeated association of undesired response with an aversive consequence. For example, an alcoholic is given a mild electric shock and asked to smell the alcohol which leads to his leaving alcohol.
Q. 4. Discuss the factors that contribute to healing in psychotherapy. Ans. Psychotherapy is a treatment of psychological distress. There are several processes which contribute to the healing process: i. ii. iii. iv.
Relaxation procedures and cognitive restructuring contribute to the healing. The therapeutic alliance has healing properties because of the warmth and empathy provided by the therapist. Healing is provided by unburdening the client of emotional problems by the process of catharsis. There are several non-specific factors associated with psychotherapy. Nonspecific factors attributable to the client/patient are motivation for change, expectation orimprovement due to treatment. Non-specific factors attributable to the therapist are positive nature, absence of unresolved emotional conflicts, presence of good mental health.
Q. 5. Describe the strategies to be adopted to prevent mental disorders. Ans. Prevention of mental disorders involves promotion of positive mental health by increasing psychological well-being, competence and resilience, and by creating supporting living conditions and environments so that an individual can face the challenges of every-day life. The following steps should be taken to promote positive mental health and hence prevent mental disorders: i. ii. iii.
iv.
Increasing awareness and reducing stigma. Schools and educational institutions to provide counselling to problem children so that mental problems can be checked at the initial stage. Appointment of industrial counsellors at work places so that a healthy environment and better relationships can be created between employees and employers. Adult members of the community to intervene in cases where there is a possibility of suicide and to reduce alcoholic or drug addiction or help children who experience stress from poverty and abuse or are neglected.
