NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Chapter 4
A map is a sort of a plot or a guide that is used for direction. A map is used to predict and figure out where things are located. It helps us to understand the complications of our large-sized Earth in an easy way. In this chapter, you will get to learn about three types of maps such as Physical Maps, Political Maps and Thematic Maps. Three components of Maps are – distance, symbol and direction. The NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science Geography Chapter 4 provided here is comprehensive and follows the latest syllabus of the CBSE Board. The solutions are solved systematically by the experts.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography PDF below
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography (The Earth: Our Habitat) Chapter 4 Maps:- Download PDF here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography Chapter 4 – Maps
1. Answer the following questions briefly. 
(a) What are the three components of a map? 
(b) What are the four cardinal directions? 
(c) What do you mean by the term ‘the scale of the map’? 
(d) How are maps more helpful than a globe? 
(e) Distinguish between a map and a plan. 
(f) Which map provides detailed information? 
(g) How do symbols help in reading maps? 
Answer 1.
(a) The three components of the map are – distance, direction and symbol.
(b) The four cardinal directions are – North, South, East and West.
(c) The scale of the map is the ratio between the actual distance on the ground and the distance shown on the map. There are two types of map based on scale – Large scale map and small scale map.
(d) A map is a representation or a drawing of the earth’s surface or a part of it drawn on a flat surface according to a scale. It is impossible to flatten a round shape and scale it. Therefore, maps are more helpful than a globe.
(e) The difference between a map and a plan is given below:
(f) Large scale maps give detailed information.
(g) Symbols represent roads, bridges, trees, railway lines, etc. through certain letters, shades, colours, pictures and lines. In this way, symbols are a convenient means of reading a map.
2. Tick the correct answers. 
(a) Maps showing distribution of forests are 
(i) Physical map (ii) Thematic Map (iii) Political map 
(b) The blue colour is used for showing 
(i) Water bodies (ii) Mountains (iii) Plains 
(c) A compass is used – 
(i) To show symbols (ii) To find the main direction (iii) To measure distance 
(d) A scale is necessary 
(i) For a map (ii) For a sketch (iii) For symbols
Answer 2.
Maps Summary
The NCERT Class 6 Geography The Earth: Our Habitat Chapter 4 contains the following topics:
Geography – The Earth: Our Habitat is an important book for Class 6 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT solutions for Class 6 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography Chapter 4What are the important questions that students can expect from Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography?Some of the important questions that students can expect from Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography are:
1. Distinguish between a map and a plan.
2. How are maps more helpful than a globe?
3. What do you mean by the term ‘the scale of the map’?
4. How do symbols help in reading maps?
5. What are the three components of a map?
Students who cannot find the correct answer to these questions can refer to the solutions to learn them effortlessly and get their doubts clarified. The PDF of solutions is a hassle-free resource that the students can rely on for their exam preparation.What will students learn in Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography?In Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography students will learn about maps and how it is used to understand the complications of our large-sized Earth in an easy way. Types of maps such as Physical Maps, Political Maps and Thematic Maps and the three components of maps – distance, symbol, and direction are the other concepts covered in this chapter. To obtain a firm grip on these concepts, students are recommended to refer to the NCERT Solutions of BYJU’S created by subject experts. Students can access these solutions for free at any time and from anywhere.Where can I obtain the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography Chapter 4 for free?You can obtain the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography Chapter 4 from BYJU’S for free. The solutions can be referred online or downloaded as PDF for offline use depending on students’ needs. Students are provided with the best guidance in the form of solutions and aids to reach their academic goals. Using these solutions regularly, students will attain a firm grip over the key concepts and revise them at ease before the exams. The PDF of solutions is available in a chapter-wise format for hassle-free and effective exam preparation.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography Chapter 4
What are the important questions that students can expect from Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography?
What will students learn in Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography?
Where can I obtain the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Geography Chapter 4 for free?
