Very Short Answer Questions

Q. 1. What do you understand by the term skill?

[CBSE Delhi 2016]

Ans. Skill is defined as proficiency, facility or dexterity that is acquired or developed
through training and experience.
Q. 2. What are the different types of skills?
Ans. American Psychological Association (1973) has identified three sets of skills. They
are assessment of individual differences, behaviour modification skills, counselling and
guidance skills.
Q. 3. State two skills of an effective psychologist.

[CBSE (AI) 2015]

Ans. Skills can be defined as the proficiency, facility or dexterity that is acquired or
developed through training and experience. Skills of an effective psychologist are:
i.
ii.

General skills: Ability to listen and be empathetic, to develop respect for or
interest in others’ culture and experience.
Observational skills: A psychologist can begin observations by carefully
scrutinizing the physical setting to capture the atmosphere.

Q. 4. What is communication?
Ans. Communication is a conscious or unconscious, intentional or unintentional process
in which feelings and ideas are expressed as verbal and/or non-verbal messages that
are sent, received and comprehended.
Q. 5. Define ‘intra-personal communication’.

[CBSE Dehi 2011; (AI) 2015]

Ans. Intra-personal communication involves communicating with yourself. It
encompasses such activities as thought processes, personal decision making and
focusing on self.
Q. 6. What is meant by interpersonal communication? [CBSE (AI) 2011, 2013,
2015]
Ans. Inter-personal communication refers to the communication that takes place
between two or more persons who establish a communicative relationship. For
example, the communication between doctor and patient, or a salesman and a
customer.
Q. 7. What is public communication?

[CBSE (AI) 2012]

Ans. Public communication is characterized by speaker sending a message to an
audience. It may be direct such as face to face message delivered by the speaker to an
audience, or indirect such as message relayed over radio or TV.
Q. 8. Explain ‘encoding’ in the communication process.
[CBSE Delhi 2011; (AI) 2012]
Ans. Encoding in the communication process involves taking ideas, giving them
meaning and putting them in message forms. For example, while taking an examination
you realize that you have not brought your pen and you ask your friend for it, i.e.,
encode a message that you need a pen.
Q. 9. Differentiate between hearing and listening.
Ans. Hearing is a biological activity that involves reception of a message through
sensory channels. It is only a part of listening. Listening is a process that involves
reception, attention, assignment of meaning and the listener response to the message
presented.
Q. 10. What is paraphrasing?

[CBSE Delhi 2015]
OR

Explain the term paraphrasing in human communication.
2011]

[CBSE (AI)

Ans. Paraphrasing involves the ability of a counsellor to reflect on what the client says
and feels using different words. Human communication becomes effective if the
counsellor understands and is again able to relate in his words what feelings and
emotions the client has described.
Q. 11. What is the role of culture in listening?
Ans. Some cultures, such as India, emphasize on listening by being a silent
communicator while some cultures focus on controlling attention.
Q. 12. Differentiate between verbal and non-verbal communication.
Ans. Verbal communication involves using a language while non-verbal communication
involves gestures, postures, eye-contact, clothing style and body movement.
Q. 13. What do you mean by congruency in communication?
Ans. Consistency between verbal and non-verbal communication is called congruency.
Q. 14. What is counselling?
Ans. Counselling involves a helping relationship that involves someone seeking help
and someone trained to give help, in a setting that permits help to be given and
received.

Q. 15. Explain ‘authenticity’ as a quality of an effective counsellor.
Ans. The degree to which the counselor is aware of the perceptions of his clients as
well as the perception of his own self indicates his self-awareness. Authenticity means
that the counsellor’s behavioural expressions are consistent with what he values, the
way he feels and relates his inner self-image.
Q. 16. Explain ‘positive regard for others’ in the context of counselling.
Ans. ‘Positive regard’ by a counselor is accepting the feelings of the client. This is
possible by using ‘I’ messages rather than ‘you’ messages, giving the client the freedom
to share feelings by not interrupting or cutting in between, by avoiding labeling the
person as an introvert etc.
Q. 17. Describe ‘empathy’ as one of the characteristics of a good counsellor.
Ans. Empathy is the ability of a counsellor to understand the feelings of another person
from her/his perspective. It is like stepping into someone else’s shoes and trying to
understand the pain and troubled feelings of the other person.

