Short Answer Questions – II

Q. 1. Describe the characteristics of a group.
2013]

[CBSE (AI)

Ans. The characteristics of a group are as follows:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.

A social unit consisting of two or more individuals.
A collection of individuals who have common motives or goals.
A collection of individuals who are interdependent. For example, fielders in a
cricket team drop a catch – this will have a consequence for the entire team.
A collection of individuals who satisfy each other’s’ needs.
A gathering of individuals who interact with one another.
The interactions in a group are structured by a set of roles and norms. That is,
the group performs the same functions every time it meets and the group
members adhere to the group norms.

Q. 2. Differentiate between crowd and teams.
Ans. A crowd is a collection of people who are present in a place or situation by
chance. There is neither any structure nor any feeling of belongingness in a crowd. The
behaviour of people in crowds is irrational and hence there is no interdependence
among the members. For example, a large number of people collected around an
accident on a road. Teams are special kind of groups who have a common goal or
purpose as in a cricket team. Both individual contribution and team work matter.
Although there is a leader, the members hold themselves responsible.
Q. 3. Differentiate between an audience and a mob.
Ans. An audience is a collection of people who have assembled for a special purpose.
For example, to watch a cricket match or a movie. They are generally passive but
sometimes become frenzy and become mobs.
A mob has a definite purpose. There is polarization in attention and actions of persons
in a common direction. Mob behaviour is characterised by homogeneity of thought and
behaviour as well as impulsivity.
Q. 4. Describe the elements of group structure.

[CBSE Delhi 2016; (AI) 2016]

Ans. The elements of a group structure are:
i.

Roles are socially defined expectations that individuals in a given situation are
expected to fulfill. You have the role of a son or a daughter and you have certain
role expectations such as to respect elders, listen to them and responsible
towards your studies.

ii.
iii.

iv.

Norms are expected standards, behaviour and beliefs enforced by group
members. They are group’s ‘unspoken rules’.
Status refers to relative social position given to group members by others. By
being members of the group we enjoy the status associated with that group.
Forexample, the captain of a cricket team has a higher status compared to other
members.
Cohesiveness refers to togetherness, binding or mutual attraction among group
members. It refers to the team spirit or ‘we feeling’ or a sense of elongingness to
the group.

Q. 5. Distinguish between primary and secondary groups.
The following are the differences between primary and secondary groups:
i.
ii.

iii.

iv.

Primary groups are pre-existing formations which are usually given to individual
whereas secondary groups are those which the individual joins by choice.
In a primary group, there is a face-to-face interaction, members have close
physical proximity and they share warm emotional bonds. In contrast, secondary
groups are those where relationships among members are more impersonal,
indirect and less frequent.
In primary group, boundaries are less permeable, i.e. members do not have the
option to choose its membership as compared to secondary groups where it is
easy to leave and join another group.
Family, caste and religion are primary groups whereas membership of a political
party is an example of a secondary group.

Q. 6. What is meant by ‘Social Loafing’? Give suitable examples.
[CBSE Delhi 2014; (AI) 2013, 2015]
Individuals work less hard in a group than they do when performing alone. This
phenomenon is referred to as social loafing. Social loafing is a reduction in individual
effort when working on a collective task. For example, in tug of war or clapping of
students in morning assembly individuals put in less effort and social loafing is
observed. This occurs because:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

Group members feel less responsible for the overall task being performed and
therefore exert less effort.
Motivation of members decreases because they realize that their contribution will
not be evaluated on individual basis.
The performance of the group is not compared with other groups.
There is improper coordination among members.

Q. 7. Why do groups take extreme decisions or why does group polarisation
occur? What is bandwagon effect?
Ans. Groups are more likely to take extreme decisions than individuals alone. This is
group polarisation. If an employee is caught taking bribe, the group might take a
decision of imposing an extreme decision of terminating his services.
When you find others also favouring capital punishment, you feel that this view is
validated by the public. This is known as bandwagon effect.
Groups take extreme decisions because
i.
ii.
iii.

In the company of like-minded people you take extreme decisions.
You feel that your view of capital punishment is validated by the public
You become a part of the group that has similar view and you start identifying
with the group.

Q. 8. What are the determinants of conformity?

[CBSE Delhi 2015]

Ans. The determinants of conformity are:
i.

ii.
iii.

iv.
v.

Size of the group: Conformity is greater when the group is small than when the
group is larger. It is easier for a deviant member to be noticed in a small group
and hence they conform because they do not want to be perceived as different.
Size of minority: When the deviating minority size increases, the likelihood of
conformity decreases.
Nature of the task: Conformity is more likely in a situation where there is a
correct or incorrect answer than when answers vary widely without any answer
being correct or incorrect.
Public or private expression of behaviour: Less conformity is found under
private expression (e.g., voting by secret ballot) than under public expression.
Personality: Highly intelligent people, those who are confident of themselves,
those who are strongly committed and have high self-esteem are less likely to
conform.

Q. 9. When does conformity occur?
Ans. Conformity takes place because of informational influence, i.e., influence that
results from accepting evidence rather than reality.
Conformity may also occur because of normative influence, i.e., influence based on a
person’s desire to be accepted or admired by others. In such cases, people conform
because deviation from group may lead to rejection or non-acceptance which is a form
of social punishment.

Q. 10. What is obedience? What do people obey?

OR
Why do people show obedience?
2012]

[CBSE (AI)

Ans. When compliance is shown to an instruction or order from a person in authority
such as parents, teachers, leaders or policemen, that is called obedience.
The causes of obedience are:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

People obey because they feel that they are not responsible for their own
actions, they are simply carrying out orders from the authority.
Authority possesses symbols of status (e.g., uniform, title) which people find
difficult to resist.
Once you obey small orders, slowly there is an escalation of commitment for the
person who is in authority and one starts obeying bigger orders.
Many times, events are moving at such a fast speed, that no one has time to
think but just to obey orders from above.

Q. 11. Differentiate between cooperation and competition.
Ans. When groups work together to achieve shared goals, we refer to it as cooperation.
For example, in a relay race, victory depends on the collective performance of all
members of a team.
Competition occurs when members try to maximize their own benefits and work for
realization of self-interest. For example, in a hundred meters race, between six people,
only one can be the winner.
Q. 12. Suggest some strategies to reduce inter-group conflicts.
[CBSE Delhi 2015; (AI) 2016]
Ans. Some of the conflict resolution strategies are:
i.
ii.

iii.
iv.

Introduction of super-ordinate goals: A super-ordinate goal is mutually
beneficial to both parties, hence both groups work cooperatively.
Conflicts can be reduced by altering perceptions and reactions through
persuasion, educational and media appeals and portrayal of groups differently in
society.
Increasing inter-group contacts: This can be done by involving groups in
conflict on neutral grounds through community projects and events.
Redrawing group boundaries: This can be done by creating conditions where
group boundaries are re-defined and groups come to perceive themselves as
belonging to a common group.

