Short Answer Questions – I

Q. 1.State some of the psychological features of environmental design of Built
Environment.
Ans. Human beings have shown creativity in the built environment as shown in:
i.
ii.
iii.

The creativity of the human mind as expressed in the work of architects, town planners
and civil engineers.
The sense of human control as shown in building of dams to regulate the natural flow of
rivers.
The work of architects as shown in the distance maintained between houses in the colony,
location of rooms within a home, the arrangement of work-desks in a school or seats in
an office.

Q. 2. Describe the various perspectives of dealing with the environment.
Ans. The various perspectives of dealing with the environment according to Stokols are:
i.
ii.
iii.

Minimalistic perspective assumes that physical environment has minimal or negligible
influence on human behavior, health and well-being.
Instrumental perspective assumes that physical environment exists for their comfort
and well-being.
Spiritual perspective refers to environment as something to be respected or valued
rather than exploited.

Q. 3. How does spiritual perspective explain human-environment relationship?
[CBSE (AI) 2012]
Ans. Spiritual perspective refers to environment as something to be respected or valued rather
than exploited. It implies that human beings will exist and will be happy only as long as the
environment is kept healthy and natural.
Q. 4. What are the environmental effects on human behaviour?
Ans. The environmental effects on human behaviour are
i.

ii.

iii.

Environmental influences on perception: It has been observed that people living in
circular huts show less error in Muller-Lyer illusion than people living in houses with
angular walls.
Environmental influences on emotions: Living in the heart of nature has a positive
effect on emotions while people suffering from natural disasters might show Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).
Ecological influences on occupation, living style and attitudes: Members of an
agricultural society develop an attitude of cooperativeness, and consider group interests

more important than individual wishes, are closer to nature and are dependent on natural
events. Members of industralised society are less close and less dependent on nature,
value independent thinking develop an attitude of competitiveness and have personal
control.
Q. 5. Why is the concept of personal space important for human beings?
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans.
i.
ii.
iii.

It explains many of the negative effects of crowding as an environmental stressor.
It tells us about our social relations. For example, we are most likely to sit beside a friend
in a library.
It gives us some idea about how physical space can be modified in order to reduce stress
or discomfort in social situations or to make social interaction more enjoyable and
fruitful.

Q. 6. Explain the concept of Non-violence as given by Mahatma Gandhi.
Ans. The religion of non-violence is not meant for the rishis or saints. It is meant for the
common people as well. Non-violence is the law of our species as violence is the law of the
brute. Non-violence does not require any outside or outward training. It simply requires the will
not to kill even in retaliation and the courage to face death without revenge.
With satya (truth) combined with ahimsa (non-violence), you can bring the world under your
feet. Satyagrah in its essence is nothing but the introduction of truth and gentleness in the
political, i.e., national life. By its very nature, non-violence cannot seize power, nor can that be
its goal. However, non-violence can do more; it can effectively control and guide power without
capturing the machinery of government.
Q. 7. Describe the behaviours associated with mental health.
Ans. The behaviours associated with mental health are:
i.

ii.

iii.

Cognitions: People seek a doctor’s help while others do not especially when the mental
health of a person is in question. A physically sound person may not have positive mental
health.
Behaviour: Our life-styles greatly influence our health. reverting to smoking, alcohol
and drug abuse, unsafe sexual behaviour due to stress result in diseases.Various
psychological techniques are being used today to alternate stress and thus modify
behaviour.
Social and cultural factors: Social and cultural norms associated with roles and gender
etc. greatly influence our health behaviour. For example, in Indian society medical advice
for a female is delayed because of various reasons.

Q. 8. How does television viewing affect human behaviour?

[CBSE (AI) 2013]

Ans. Television provides a large amount of infotainment in an attractive form. Children spend
huge amounts of time watching them. They have effect on children’s ability to concentrate on
one target, their creativity and ability to understand, and also their social interactions. There are
excellent programmes that emphasise positive interpersonal attitudes and provide factual
information, teaching children how to design and construct certain objects.
On the other hand, television viewing reduces children’s habit of reading and writing, and also
their outdoor activities such as playing. The programmes also interfere with their ability to
concentrate on one target. Also watching violence on television is linked to great aggressiveness
in the viewers.
Q. 9. What do understand by Human Rights?
Ans. Human Rights refer to the basic rights and freedoms to which all humans are entitled.
These include civil and political rights such as right to life and liberty, freedom of expression and
equality before the law; and social, cultural and economic rights, including the right to
participate in culture, the right to food, the right to work and the right to education. These rights
empower people under difficult circumstances. The awareness about human rights is important
to live life as a citizen in a democratic set up.
Q. 10. How is peace promoted in our society?
Ans.
i.
ii.

iii.

Peace Education: Just as man learns to fight and go to war, he can also learn to live
peacefully.
Development of International relations: We need to promote conducive international
relations so as to eliminate prejudice and stereotypes, which are rootcauses of hostility,
war and violence. This can be achieved by creating opportunities for people of different
parts of the world top come in contact with each other.
Social and Economic Welfare: Social and economic inequalities constitute the greatest
single enemy or permanent peace. In most of the places where war and conflict is taking
place poverty is very common. Therefore, it is important that steps be taken to bridge the
gap between the haves and have nots.

