Short Answer Questions - I

Q. 1. State the techniques of self-control.

[CBSE Delhi 2014; (AI) 2013]

Ans. The psychological techniques of self-control are:
I.
II.
III.

Observation of our own behaviour: This refers to changing, modifying or
strengthening certain aspects of self.
Self instruction: This refers to instructing ourselves to do something and behave
accordingly.
Self-reinforcement: This involves rewarding behaviours that have pleasant
consequences. For, e.g., going to a movie after doing well in exams.

Q. 2. How parents can contribute in developing self-esteem of the child?
Ans. Warm and positive parenting helps in development of high self-esteem among
children as it allows them to know that they are accepted as competent and worthwhile.
Children whose parents help or make decisions for them even when they do not need
assistance, often suffer from low self-esteem.
Q. 3. Describe the relationship between culture and self.
OR
Explain the views of self in different cultures.
2014]

[CBSE (AI)

Ans. Many aspects of self are linked with the characteristic features of the culture in
which one lives. Analysis of self in Indian cultural context shows many features that are
distinct from those found in the Western cultural context. Western cultures are
characterized as individualistic, with rigid boundaries between self and others, whereas
Asian cultures are characterized as collectivistic with flexible boundaries between self
and others.

Q. 4. Describe the features of personality
Ans. Personality is characterised by the following features:
I.
II.
III.
IV.

It has both physical and psychological components.
Its expression in terms of behaviour is fairly unique in a given individual.
Its main features do no easily change with time.
It is dynamic in the sense that some of its features may change due to internal or
external situational demands, i.e. adaptive to situations.

Q. 5. Is personality a dynamic organization? Explain.
Ans. Dynamic means change due to internal or external demands. Allport proposed that
individuals possess a number of traits which are dynamic in nature. They determine
behaviour in such a manner that an individual approaches different situations withsimilar
plans. He acknowledged that people sharing the same traits might express them in
different ways, and any variation in traits would elicit a different response in the same
situation.
Q. 6. Explain the interactional approach to personality.

[CBSE (AI) 2013]

Ans. The interactional approach to the study of personality holds that situational
characteristics play an important role in determining our behaviour. People may behave
as dependent or independent not because of their internal personality trait, but because
of external rewards or threats available in a particular situation. For example, people’s
behaviour in a market, courtroom or a place of worship.
Q. 7. Discuss personality types given by Sheldon.
Ans. Sheldon proposed the following personality types:
i.
ii.
iii.

Endomorphs: They are fat, soft and round. By temperament they are relaxed
and sociable.
Mesomorphs: They have strong musculature, are rectangular with a strong body
build. They are energetic and courageous.
Ectomorphs: They are thin, long, fragile in body build. They are brainy, artistic
and introvert.

Q. 8. Describe Eysenck’s theory of personality.
Ans. H. J. Eysenck proposed that personality could be reduced into three dimensions:
i.

Neuroticism vs. Emotional Stability: At one end of the dimension there are
people who are neurotic who are anxious, moody, touchy, restless and quickly
lose control. At the other extreme lie people who are calm, even-tempered,
reliable and remain under control.

ii.

iii.

Extraversion vs. Introversion: At one extreme are people who are outgoing,
active, gregarious, impulsive and thrill-seeking while at the other end are people
who are withdrawn, passive quiet, cautious and reserved.
Psychoticism vs. Sociability: A psychotic person is hostile, egocentric and
antisocial.

Q. 9. What are the three levels of consciousness proposed by Sigmund Freud?
Ans. Freud described the human mind in terms of three levels of consciousness:
i.
ii.
iii.

Conscious: It includes the thoughts, feelings and actions of which people are
aware.
Preconscious: It includes mental activity of which people may become aware
only if they attend to it closely.
Unconscious: It includes mental activity that people are unaware of.

Q. 10. Describe the unconscious as stated by Freud.
Ans. According to Freud, the unconscious is a reservoir of instinctive or animal drives,
which also stores all ideas and wishes that are concealed from conscious awareness,
perhaps because they lead to psychological conflicts. Most of these arise from sexual
desires which cannot be expressed openly and therefore are repressed. People
constantly struggle to find either some socially acceptable ways to express unconscious
impulses, or to keep those impulses away from being expressed. Unsuccessful
resolution of conflicts results in abnormal behaviour. Analysis of forgetting,
mispronunciations, jokes and dreams provide us a means to approach the unconscious.
Freud developed a therapeutic procedure, called psychoanalysis, whose basic goal is to
bring the repressed unconscious materials to consciousness, helping people live in a
more self-aware and integrated manner.
Q. 11. Describe the structure of personality.
Ans. According to Freud, there are three structural elements of personality:
i.

ii.

iii.

Id: It deals with immediate gratification of primitive needs, sexual desires and
aggressive impulses. It is based on the pleasure principle in which people seek
pleasure and try to avoid pain. For example, a boy who wants an ice-cream
cone, will grab the cone and eat it.
Ego: It grows out of id, and seeks to satisfy an individual’s instinctual needs in
accordance with reality. It works on the reality principle. For example, a boy who
wants an ice-cream cone, will ask for permission to eat the cone.
Superego: The superego tells the id and ego whether gratification in a particular
instance is ethical. It is the administrative division of personality. For example a
boy who wants an icecream cone, his superego will indicate whether his
behaviour is morally correct. Obtaining the ice-cream cone will create guilt, fear
or anxiety in the boy.

Unconscious is composed of these three competing forces. In some people, the id is
stronger while in others it is the superego. The relative strength of the id, ego and
superego determines each person’s stability. The instinctual life force that energizes the
id is called libido. It works on the pleasure principle, and seeks immediate gratification.
Q. 12. Describe the theory by Jung.
Ans. Jung developed analytical theory of personality in which he claimed that there was
a collective unconscious consisting of archetypes or primordial images. These are found
in myths, dreams and arts of all mankind.
Q. 13. Describe the theory by Karen Horney.

[CBSE (AI) 2015]

Ans. Karen Horney criticized Freud’s theory in his treatment of women as inferior. She
claimed that women are more likely to be affected by social and cultural factors than by
biological factors. She argued that psychological disorders were caused by
disturbedinterpersonal relationships during childhood. Indifferent, discouraging and
erratic behaviour of parents makes the child feel insecure and basic anxiety results. If
parents are indifferent or dominant or show too much or too little approval, children
feelisolated and helpless which interfere with their healthy development.
Q. 14. Describe the theory by Alfred Adler.

[CBSE (AI) 2015]

Ans. Alfred Adler is known as individual psychology in which he assumes that human
behaviour is purposeful and goal-directed. Our personal goals are the sources of our
motivation. In Adler’s view every individual suffers from the feelings of inadequacy and
guilt i.e., inferiority complex which arise from childhood. Overcoming this complex is
essential for optimal personality development.

Q. 15. Discuss Erich Fromm’s theory of personality
Ans. Erich Fromm viewed human beings as social beings who could be understood in
terms of the relationship with others. He argued that psychological qualities such as
growth and realization of potentials resulted from desire for freedom and striving for
justice and truth.
Q. 16. Discuss Erikson’s concept of identity crisis. [CBSE Delhi 2016; (AI) 2016]
Ans. Erik Erikson laid stress on rational, conscious ego processes in personality
development. He viewed development as a life-ling process with a central place granted
to ego identity. His concept of identity crisis of adolescent age has shown considerable
attention. The primary task of adolescence is to establish an identity separate from their
parents. In this process, the adolescents experience conflict with their parents and with
themselves. Those who are not able to cope with this identity crisis are confused. This
‘identity confusion’, according to Erikson, can lead them to isolate themselves from their
peers and family, or they lose their identity in the crowd. Adolescents on one hand may
desire independence and at the same time show a great deal of dependence on their
parents. Rapid fluctuations of self-confidence and insecurity are typical of this stage.
Q. 17. Describe the behavioural approach to the study of personality.
[CBSE Delhi 2016; (AI) 2013]
Ans. Behaviourists believe in data which are definable, observable, measurable and
scientifically verifiable. They focus on learning of stimulus-response connections and
their reinforcement. Personality is not biologically determined and is learned through
classical conditioning, operant conditioning and modelling. The principles of theories of
classical conditioning (Pavlov), instrumental conditioning (Skinner) and observational
learning (Bandura) have been widely used in developing personality theories. A
response is the structural unit of behaviour. If a particular response is positively
reinforced, then it is repeated again and again and becomes a part of habit. Personality
is basically a bundle of habits. For example, initially children eat vegetables such as
spinach, pumpkin and gourds because of appreciation or reinforcement from their
parents, but later they develop the taste of these vegetables.
Q. 18. Describe the cultural approach to the study of personality.
Ans. This approach attempts to understand personality in relation to the features of
ecological and cultural environment. In agricultural societies, children are socialized to
be obedient to elders, nurturant to youngsters and responsible to their duties. In
contrast hunting-gathering societies show independence, autonomy and are
achievement-oriented.

Q. 19. Describe the humanistic approach to personality.
[CBSE (AI) 2012, 2013, 2016]
Ans. Humanistic approach to personality was proposed by Carl Rogers and Abraham
Maslow, emphasise personal responsibility and innovate tendencies towards personal
growth. They focus on the importance of people’s subjective attitudes, feelings and
beliefs, especially with regard to the self. Human beings are most creative, growing,
fully functioning and self-actualising people, fulfillment is the motivating force for
personality development. Psychologically healthy persons live life to the fullest.
Two assumptions by Rogers are that
Behaviour is goal directed or worthwhile
People choose adaptive and self-actualising behaviour
Humanistic theories emphasise personal responsibility and innovate tendencies toward
personal growth. They focus on the importance of people’s subjective attitudes, feelings
and beliefs especially with regard to the self. Human beings are most creative, growing,
fully functioning and self-actualising people. Psychologically healthy persons live life to
the fullest.Rogers suggest that each person has a concept of ideal self, what a person
would like to be. When there is a correspondence between real self and ideal self, a
person is generally happy. Discrepancy between real self and ideal self results in
unhappiness and dissatisfaction. People have a tendency to maximize self-concept
through selfactualisation. When a person has high self-concept, s/he has a high selfesteem and vice-versa. People with high self-esteem are flexible and open to new
experiences. An atmosphere of unconditional positive regard must be created in order
to ensure enhancement of people’s self-concept. This theory emphasizes the
significance of positive aspects of life which may be supported by the following diagram.

Q. 20. What are self-report measures? Explain three self-report measures with
examples.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans. Self-report measures are structured measures that require subjects to give
responses using some kind of rating scale. Some of the self-report measures are:
i.

ii.

iii.

The Minnesota Multiphase Personality Inventory (MMPI): It contains 567
statements in which the subject has to state true or false. The test is divided into
10 subsets and diagnoses depression, hysteria, psychopathology, schizophrenia,
mania, social-introversion etc.
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (EPQ): This test measures personality
traits on three dimensions Introversion-Extraversion, Neuroticism-Emotional
stability and Psychoticism-Sociability.
Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF): This test was developed by
Cattell. On the basis of his studies, he identified a large set of personality
descriptors, which were subjected to factor analysis to identify the basic
personality structure. This test provides with declarative statements and the
subject responds to a specific situation by choosing from a set of given
alternatives.

