CBSE

2018 History Solved Paper

History 2018
Time allowed

1.

: 3 hours

PART-A
Describe the basis on which archaeologists
identified the centres of craft production in the
Harappan culture.
(2)
Answer : The basis on which archaeologists identify
the centers of craft production are :
(i) Raw materials such as stone nodules, whole
shells, copper ore, etc.
(ii} Rejects and waste material ;: It is one of the
best indicators of craftwork. For instance, if shell

or stone is cut to make objects, then pieces of these
materials will be discarded as waste at the place of
production.
(iii) Finished products : Sometimes, larger waste
pieces were used up to make smaller objects which
suggest that apart from small, specialised centres,
craft production was also undertaken in large cities
such as Mohenjodaro and Harappa.
. Explain the sources of revenue of Village
Panchayats during the Mughal rule in India. [2]
Answer : Sources of revenue of Village Panchayats
during the Mughal rule in India were :
1. Contribution made by individuals to a common
financial pool.
2. Agricultural ‘Taxes.
Examine the impact of ‘Limitation Laws’
passed by the British in 1859,
[2]
Answer: In 1859, the Britishers passed the Law
of Limitation, stating that the loan bonds signed
between the money lenders and the ryots would have
validity for three years only.
Effects of the law were :
(i} The money lenders manipulated and forced the
ryots to sign a new bond every three years.
(ii} Moneylenders refused to give receipts when
loans were repaid, entered fictitious figures in
bonds, acquited the peasants’ harvest at low prices,
moneylenders ultimately took over peasants’
property.
PART-B
. “There are indications of complex decisions

being taken and implemented in the Harappan
society.” In the light of this statement, explain
whether there may have been rulers to rule over
the Harappan society.
[4]
Answer ; There are indications of complex decisions
being taken and implemented in Harappan society.
Fyidences are :
(i) A large building found at Mohenjodaro
was labelled as a palace by archaeologists but no

wiv. chsepdf.cam

Dec

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

Maximum marks : 80
spectacular finds were associated with it.
(ii) Some archaeologists are of the opinion that
Harappan society had no rulers, and that everybody
enjoyed equal status.
(iti) Others feel there was no single ruler but several,
that Mohenjodaro had a separate ruler, Harappa
another, and so forth.
(iv) According to some scholars, the last theory
seems the most plausible, as it is unlikely that entire

communities could have collectively made and
implemented such complex decisions.
(v} ‘There was extraordinary uniformity of Harappan
artefacts.
(vi) The bricks, though obviously not produced in
any single centre, were of a uniform ratio throughout
the region, from Jammu to Gujarat,
(vii) Labour was mobilised for making bricks and
for the construction of massive walls and platforms.
A planned urban centre with well laid out drainage
system.
5. Describe the economic and social conditions
of the people living in rural areas from c. 600
BCE to 600 CE.
[2+2=4
Answer : There was a differentiation amongst the

people of rural are as :
Economic conditions :
(i) Acccording to Jataka and Panchatantra, the

relationship between a king and his subjects, could
often be strained — kings frequently tried to fill
their coffers by demanding high taxes. The peasants
patticularly found the demarids oppressive. Escaping
into the forests remained an option.
(ii) Different strategies such as (a) shift to plough
agriculture, (b) iron plough share for the growth in
agricultural productivity, (c) the use of irrigation,
through wells and tanks and less commonly, canals
were adopted for increasing production.
(iii) Land grants provide some insight into the
relationship between cultivators and the state.
Social condition :
(i) There was a growing differentiation amongst
people engaged in agriculturetandless agricultural
labourers, small peasants, as well as large landholders.
(ii) The large landholders, as well as the village
headman emerged as powerful figures and often
exercised control over other cultivators.
(iii) There was gendered assess to property.
(iv) A variety of occupations followed by the people
belonging to different castes/varnas.
6. “Ibn

Battuta

subcontinent

found

cities

in

the

Indian

full of exciting opportunities.”

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2018 History Solved Paper

Dc

Explain the statement with reference to the city

of Delhi.

[4]

Answer : Ibn Battuta found cities in the Indian
subcontinent full of exciting opportunities, especially
the city of Delhi:
(i) Delhi covers a wide area and has a dense
population.
(ii) There is a rampart round the city that is without

parallel. The breadth of its wall is eleven cubics and
inside it, there are houses for the night sentry and
gatekeepers.
(iii) Inside the ramparts, there are store houses for
storing edibles, magazines, ammunition, ballistas and

siege machines.
(iv) There are twenty eight gates in the city which
are called darwaza in which, Budaun Darwaza is the
biggest.
(v} In Gul Darwaza there is an orchard. It has fine
cemetery in which praves have domes over them and
those that do not have a dome, have an arch for sure.
7. “Sufism evolved as a reaction to the growing
materialism of the Caliphate as a religious and
political institution.” Elucidate.
[4]
Answer : (i) The sufis laid emphasis on secking
salvation through intense devotion and love for God.
(ii) They sought an interpretation of the Qur’an
on the basis of their personal experience and were
critical of the definitions and scholastic methods of
interpreting the Qur’an adopted by theologians.
(iii) By the eleventh century Sufism evolved into a
well-developed movement with a body of literature
on Quranic studies and sufi practices.
(iv) The sufisilsila was a kind of chain or link
between master and disciple for seeking spiritual
power and blessings.
(v) Special riruals of initiation were developed like

wearing patched cloths, shaving their head, open
kitchen run on charity.
8. Examine the participation of the Taluqdars of
Awadh in the Revolt of 1857.
[4]
Answer : {i} The Taluqdars of Awadh, for many

generations had conrolled the lands and power in
the countryside and had maintained armed retainers,
built forts and enjoyed a degree of autonomy as
long as they accepted the suzerainty of the Nawabs
and paid the revenues of their Talugqas but the
Bnitish were unwilling to tolerate the power of the
Taluqdars. After the annexation, the Taluqdars were
disarmed and their forts were destroyed.
(ii) The Bnitish land revenue policy also hit the
position of Taluqdars. In southern Awadh, the
Taluqdars lost more than half of their total villages
** Answer is not given due to change in present syllabus.

Wwiww.chsepadf.cam

‘

wniload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

they previously held.
(iii) British revenue flows for the state increased
and the burden of demand on the peasants did not
decline, the increase in the revenue demand increased
from 30 to 70 percent. Thus, neither the Taluqdars
nor the peasants had any reason to be happy with
the annexation of Awadh.
(iv) In areas like Awadh, whete resistance duting
1857 was intense and long lasting, talugdars and their
peasants had carried out the fightng.
9. Explain why some hili stations were developed
during the colonial period in India.
[4]
Answer: (i} The cold climate of the Indian hills was
seen as an advantage. Particularly, since the Brinsh
associated the hot weather with epidemucs.
(ii) Hill stations were established mainly for the
army, to protect them from diseases like cholera
and malaria. They also became strategic places for
billering troops guarding fronuers and launching
campaipns against enemy rulers.
(iii) These hill stations were also developed as
Sanatoriums 2.2, places where soldiers could be sent

for rest.
(iv) These places were suitable for British rulers due
to the cold climate where new rulers and viceroy

could go for rest in the summer.
PART-C
10. “By 1922 Gandhiji and transformed Indian
nationalism, thereby redeeming the promise
he made in his BHU speech of February 1916.
It was no longer a movement of professionals
and intellectuals; now, hundreds of thousands

of peasants, workers
and artisans also
participated in it, Many of them venerated
Gandhiji, referring to him as their ‘Mahatma’,
They appreciated the fact that he dressed like
them, lived like them and spoke their language,
unlike other leaders he did not stand apart from
the common folk, but empathised
and even

identified with them.”
In the light of the above passage, highlight any
four values upheld by Mahatma Gandhi.” [8]
11. Trace out the growth of Buddhism. Explain the
main teachings of Buddha.
OR
Trace out how stupas were built. Explain
why the stupa

at Sanchi survived, but not at

Amravati.
f4+4=8]
Answer : (i} Buddhism grew rapidly both during the
lifetime of the Buddha and after his death.
(ii) It appealed to many people dissatisfied with
existing religious practices and confused by the rapid
social changes taking place around them.

No OTP

No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2018 History Solved Paper

{iii} The importance attached to conduct and valucs
rather than claims of superiority based on birth, the
emphasis placed on metta (fellow fecling) and karuna
(Compassion), especially for those who were younger
and weaker than oneself, were ideas that drew men
and women to Buddhist teachings.

(iv) Buddhism grew due to Buddhist text—Tipitaka
(the Vinaya Pitaka, Sutta Pitaka, Abhidhamma Pitaka),
the Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa, Ashokavadana,
Jatakas and Buddhist hagiography.
(v) Buddhist Sanghas, Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis
spread the message.
Teachings :
(i) The world is transient (anicca) and changing
constantly.
(ii) It 1s soulless (anatta} as there 1s nothing
permanent or eternal.
(tii) In the transient world, sorrow is intnnsic to
human existence, It is by followmg the path of
moderation between severe penance and selfindulgence that human beings can rise above these
wordly troubles,
(iv) Buddha emphasised individual agency and
tighteous action as the means to escape from the
cycle of re-birth and attain self-realisation.
(v) Extinguish ego and desire to end the cycle of
suffering,
OR
Stupas were regarded as sacred as it contained
relics of the Buddha such as his bodily remains or
objects used by him were buried there. According
to a Buddhist text, the Ashoka Vadana, Ashoka
distributed portions of the Buddha's relics to every

important town and ordered the construction of
stupas over them. By the second century BCE,
Bharhut, Sanchi and Sarnath, had been built.
Inscriptions found on the railings and pillars of

the stupas record donations made for buildings and
decoration made on them. Some donations were
made by kings such as the satavahanas others were
made by guilds such as that of tvory workers who
financed a part of one of the gateways at Sanchi.
The Amaravati could not survive because :
Perhaps Amaravati was discovered before the
scholars understood the value of the findings and
realised
how critical it was to preserve
such things where
they had been found instead they thought of removing
them from the site.
The stupas at Amaravati were changed and some of
the slabs from the Amaravati stupas had been taken
to different places, for example, they were taken to
Kolkata, Chennai and London and were used in other

structures, Local rajas also took remains of Amravati
Stupa to build their ternples.
The Sanchi Stupa survives because :
It escaped from the eyes of railway contractors,
builders and those looking for finds to carry away

wwww.cbsepdf.com

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

to the museums of Europe. The rulers of Bhopal,
Shahjehan Begum and her successor Sultan Jehan

Begum provided money for its preservation. H, H.
Cole was against the looting of original works of
ancient art. Nineteenth-century Europeans were
very interested in the Stupa at Sanchi. That's why, it
survived the test of nme.
2. Explain why the nobility were recruited from
different races and religious groups by the
Mughal rulers in India.
OR
Explain the role played by women of the
imperial household in the Mughal Empire. [8]
Answer ; (i) The nobility was recruited from diverse
cthnic and religious groups which ensured that no
faction was large enough to challenge the authority
of the state.

(ii) The officers of the Mughals were described as
a bouquet of flowers held together by loyalty to rhe
emperor. The emperor was very respectful among
the religious saints and scholars.
(iii) Turani and Iranian nobles were the earliest
in Akbar’s imperial service. Akbar was a great and
intelligent king and wanted skillful people to join
him in his state.
(tv) Two ruling groups of Indian origin entered the
imperial service—the Rajputs and the Indian Muslims.
(v) The nobles participated in military campaigns
and also served as officers of the empire in their
respective provinces.
(vi) The mansaobdars had two numerical
designations : Zat which was an indicator of
position in the imperial hierarchy and sawar.
(vii} Members of Hindu castes inclined towards
education and accountancy were also promoted,
a famous example being Akbar's finance minister,
Raja Todar Mal, who belonged to the Khatn caste.
OR
(i) After Noor Jahan, Mughal queens and princesses
began to contol significant financial resources,
(ii) Shan Jahan’s daughters Jahanara and Roshanara
enjoyed an annual income often equal to that of high
imperial Mansabdars,
(iii) Conttol over the resources enabled important
women of thc Mughal household to commission
(iv) The throbbing centre of Shahjahanabad, was
the bazaar of Chandni Chowk which was designed
by Jahanara.
(v} Gulbadan Begum, the daughter of Babar and
Humayun'’s sister wrote Humayun Nama, depicting
the glimpse of the domestic world of Mughals.
(vi) Gulbadan described in great detail, the conflicts
and tension among the princes and kings.
(vii) The general practice of Mughal houschold
consisted of the emperor's wives, concubincs, his

near and distant relatives and female servants and

3

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2018 History Solved Paper

De

slaves, Elderly women of the family played an
important role in resolving conflicts.
(vill) The begams, marned after receiving huge
amounts of cash and valuables as dower (mahr),
naturally received a higher status and greater
attention from their husbands than did aghas.
(ix) The concubines occupied the lowest position in
the hierarchy. They all recetved monthly allowances
in cash, supplemented with gifts according to their
status.
PART-D
13. “The communal politics that started during the
eatly decades of the 20" century was largely
responsible for the partition of the country.”

Examine the statement.
OR
“Partition of India had made nationalists
fervently opposed to the idea of separate
electorates.” Examine the statement.
[3]
Answer : (i) Separate electorates for Muslims were
created by the colonial povernment in 1909 and
expanded in 1919. It crucially shaped the nature of
communal politics. Separate electorates meant that
Muslims could now clect their own representatives
in designated constitucnocics.
(11) Working politicians used their own slogans and
gathered in masses by distributing favours to their
own religious groups.
(iii) There was active opposition and hostility
between the communities.
(iv) Cow protection movement by Arya Samaj
brought back the people to the Hindu fold those
who had recently converted to Islam.
(v) The provincial elections of 1937 and the Copps
Mission of 1942.
(vi) Hindus were angered by the rapid spread of

Tabligh and Tanzim after 1923, Communal riots
deepened the differences between the communities,
creating disturbing memories of violence.
OR
(1)
The Nationalists werc haunted by the
continued civil war and riots during partition days.
(u) 3B. Pocker Bahadur made a strong plea for
scparate clectorate for Muslims in the constituent
assembly.
(iii) The idea of separate electorate provoked
anper and dismay amongst most nationalists in the
constitucnt assembly.
(iv) It was seen as a measure introduced by British
to divide Indians.
(v) This was the demand, which turned one community against other.

(vi) It divided the people on communal levels. It
Strained relation and causc blood.

(vit) It was against the principle of democracy.
(viii)It was suicidal for the nation according to
G. B. Pant.

www.cbsepdf.com

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

(ix) Separate clectorate could lead to divide
loyalties and difficult to forge a strong nation and a

strong state.
(x) Isolating the minorities would deprive them
of any effective say within the government.
14. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
“Proper” Social Roles
Here is a story from the Ad Parven of the
Mababharata:
Once Drona, a Brabmana who taught archery to
the Kuru princes, was approached by Ekalavya, a
forest-dwelling mishada (a hunting community).
When Drona, who knew the dbarma, refused to
have him as his pupil, Ekalavya returned to the

forest, prepared an image of Drona out of clay, and
treating it as his teacher, began to practise on his
own. In due coutse, he acquired great skill in archery.
One day, the Kuru princes went hunting and their
dog, wandering in the woods, came upon Ekalavya.
When the dog smelt the dark #ishada wrapped in
black deer skin, his body caked with dirt, it began
to bark. Annoyed, Ekalavya shot seven arrows into
its mouth. When the dog returned to the Pandavas,

they were amazed at this superb display of archery.
They tracked down Ekalavya, who introduced
himself as a pupil of Drona.
Drona had once told his favourite student
Anjuna, that he would unrivalled amongst his
pupus. Arjuna now reminded Drona about thts.
Drona approached Ekalavya, who immediately
acknowledged and honoured him as his teacher.
When Drona demanded his right thumb as his fee,
Ekalavya unhesitatingly cut it off and offered it. But

thereafter, when he shot with his remaining fingers,
he was no longer as fast as he had been before.
Thus, Drona kept his word ; no onc was better than
Arjuna.
(14.1)
Why did Drona refuse to have Ekalavya
as his pupil ?
,
[2]
(14.2)
How had Drona kept his word given to
Arjuna ?
[2]
(14.3)
Do you think Drona’s behaviour with
Ekalavya was justified P If so, give
reason.
[3]
Answer : (14.1) Drona, was a Brahmana who knew
dharma. He taught archery to the Kuru princes. Once
he was approached by Ekalavya, a forest dwelling
Nishada (a hunting community) to teach him archery
but Drona refused to have Ekalavya as his pupil as
he was a person of low origin.
(14.2) Drona gave his world to Arjuna would
be unrivalled amongst the pupils. To prove this
Drona demanded Eklavya's right thumb as his fee,
Ekalavya unhesitatingly cut it off and offered it

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2018 History Solved Paper

Di

to the guru, so he was no longer as fast as he had
been before.
(14.3) Drona’s behaviour with Ekalavya was justified
because he promised to Arjuna to be the best in
atchery but when he saw Ekalavya he was amazed
at the supentor display of archery by him. Ekalavya
was a better archerer than Arjuna thus, to keep his
promise to Arjuna, Drona demanded the thumb of
his right hand as fee from Ekalavya.
15. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
Colin Mackenzie
Born in 1754, Colin Mackenzie became famous as
an engineer, surveyor arid cartographer. In 1815 he

was appointed the first Surveyor General of India,
a post he held till his death in 1821. He embarked
on collecting local histories and surveying historic
sites in order to better understand India’s past
and make governance of the colony easier. He
says that “it struggled long under the miseries of
bad management... before the South came under
the benign influence of the British government.”
By studying Vijaynagar, Mackenzie believed that
the East India Company could gain “much useful
information on many of these instirutions, laws and
customs whose influence sul! prevails among the

various Tnbes of Natives forming the general mass
of the population to this day,”

(15.1)

Who was Colin Mackenzie ?

(15.2)

How did Mackenzie try to rediscover

(15.3)

the Vijaynagar Empire?

[2]

[2]

How was the study of the Vijaynagar
Empire useful to the East India
Company ?
[3]
Answer : (15.1) Colin Mackenzie was a famous
engineer, surveyor and cartoprapher of the EIC. He
surveyed historic sites in order to better understand
India’s past and make governance of the colony

easier. In 1815, he was appointed the frst Surveyor
General of India.
(15.2) He embarked on collecting local histories and
surveying historic sites in order to better understand

India’s past which included Vijaynagar in South of
India.
(15.3) By studying Vijay nagar, Mackenzie believed

that the East India Company could gain useful
information on many of the instirucon laws and
customs whose influence still prevails among the
various Tribes of Natives forming the general mass
of population of this day.
16. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
“Tomorrow we shall break the salt tax law”
Qn 5 April, 1930 Mahatma Gandhi spoke at
Dandi :
When I left Sabarman with my companions for
this seaside hamlet of Dandi, I was not certain in

www. cbsepdf.com

wniload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

my mind that we would be allowed to reach this
place. Even while I was at Sabarmati there was a
rumour that I might be arrested. J had thought that
the Government might perhaps let my party come
as far as Dandi, but not me certainly. If someone

says that this betrays imperfect faith on my part, I
shall not deny the charge. That I have reached here
is in no small measure due to the power of peace
and non-violence : that power is universally felt.
The Government may, if 1t wishes, congratulate
itself on acting as it has done, for it could have
arrested every one of us. In saying that it did not
have the courage to arrest this army of peace, we
praise it. It felt ashamed to arrest such an army.
He is a civilised man who feels ashamed to do
anything which his neighbours would disapprove.
The Government deserves to be congratulated on
not arresting us, even if it desisted only from fear
of world opinion.
Tomorrow we shall break the salt tax law. Whether
the Government will tolerate that is a different
question. It may not tolerate it, but it deserves
congratulations on the patience and forbearance it

has displayed in regard to this party......
WhatifT and all the eminent leaders in Gujarat and in
the rest of the country are arrested P This movernent
is based on the faith that when a whole nation is
roused and on the march no leader is necessary.
(16.1)
What were the apprehensions of
Mahatma Gandhi when he started his
Dandi March ?
[2]

(16,2) Why did Gandhijisay
thatthe Government
(163)

deserve to be congratulated P
Why was the ‘Salt March’
sipnificant ?

[2]
very
[3]

Answer : (16.1) He was not certain that he would
be allowed to reach Dandi. Gandhiji suspected he
might be arrested, as he said, “Government might

perhaps let my party come as far as Dandi but not
me certainly”.

(16.2) According to Gandhi, the Government

deserved to be congratulated on not arresting them,
even if it desisted only becasue of the fear of world
opinion,
(16.3) (i) The salt march was significant because
it brought Gandhi into limelight and attracted the
world’s attention.
(ii) Women participation was very high.
(iii) It forced the Butish to think that their Brush
Raj will not continue further.
(iv) Gandhi mobilized a wider discontent against
British rule.

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

De

CBSE 2018 History Solved Paper

PART-E
17. (17.1) Onthe piven political outline mapof India,
locate and label the following appropriately :
(a) Amritsar—an important centre of National
Movement.

~—

aa

a

.

hd

*‘

i

a

t
he

ae
=

a

I

.

-

}

Answer:

oN

wiww.cbhsepdf.cam

af he?
he

:.

=
7

17
4 .
so

Cf

’

ak

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

(b) Agra—a territory under Babur.
(17.2) On the same political outline map of
India, three places which are major Buddhist
sites have been marked as A, B and C. Identify
them and write their correct names on the lines
drawn near them.
—

5

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

Students dont need to pur
Bank or Sample/model paps¢
will be available on this w
PDFs by 30 September. Or
following materials will be ¢

Pwr

NCERT Solutions
Previous Years Papers |
Previous Years Chapte:

20 Solved Sample Pape

Students can download from f

www.cbsi
A mission for fre

chase any Guide, Question
-r from market. All material
rebsite in the form of free

| website www.cbsepdf.com
rovided :

(2011-2019)
rwise Question Bank
r
ollowing website

epdf.com
-e content for all.

