SECTION I

EVENTS AND PROCESSES

Revolution

Chapter I is on the French Revolution. Today we often take the ideas of liberty,
freedom and equality for granted. But we need to remind ourselves that these ideas
also have a history. By looking at the French Revolution you will read a small part
of that history. The French Revolution led to the end of monarchy in France. A
society based on privileges gave way to a new system of governance. The Declaration
of the Rights of Man during the revolution, announced the coming of a new time.
The idea that all individuals had rights and could claim equality became part of a
new language of politics. These notions of equality and freedom emerged as the central
ideas of a new age; but in different countries they were reinterpreted and rethought
in many different ways. The anti-colonial movements in India and China, Africa and
South America, produced ideas that were innovative and original, but they spoke in
a language that gained currency only from the late eighteenth century.

French

In Chapter II, you will read about the coming of socialism in Europe, and the dramatic
events that forced the ruling monarch, Tsar Nicholas II, to give up power. The Russian
Revolution sought to change society in a different way. It raised the question of
economic equality and the well-being of workers and peasants. The chapter will tell
you about the changes that were initiated by the new Soviet government, the problems
it faced and the measures it undertook. While Soviet Russia pushed ahead with
industrialisation and mechanisation of agriculture, it denied the rights of citizens
that were essential to the working of a democratic society. The ideals of socialism,

The

EVENTS AND PROCESSES

In Section I, you will read about the French Revolution, the Russian Revolution,
and the rise of Nazism. In different ways all these events were important in the
making of the modern world.

1
2020-21

however, became part of the anti-colonial movements in different countries. Today
the Soviet Union has broken up and socialism is in crisis but through the twentieth
century it has been a powerful force in the shaping of the contemporary world.
Chapter III will take you to Germany. It will discuss the rise of Hitler and the
politics of Nazism. You will read about the children and women in Nazi Germany,
about schools and concentration camps. You will see how Nazism denied various
minorities a right to live, how it drew upon a long tradition of anti-Jewish feelings
to persecute the Jews, and how it waged a relentless battle against democracy and
socialism. But the story of Nazism’s rise is not only about a few specific events,
about massacres and killings. It is about the working of an elaborate and frightening
system which operated at different levels. Some in India were impressed with the
ideas of Hitler but most watched the rise of Nazism with horror.

India and the Contemporary World

The history of the modern world is not simply a story of the unfolding of freedom
and democracy. It has also been a story of violence and tyranny, death and destruction.

2
2020-21

Chapter I

The French Revolution
On the morning of 14 July 1789, the city of Paris was in a state of
alarm. The king had commanded troops to move into the city. Rumours
spread that he would soon order the army to open fire upon the citizens.
Some 7,000 men and women gathered in front of the town hall and
decided to form a peoples’ militia. They broke into a number of
government buildings in search of arms.

R e v o l u t i o n

Finally, a group of several hundred people marched towards the eastern
part of the city and stormed the fortress-prison, the Bastille, where they
hoped to find hoarded ammunition. In the armed fight that followed,
the commander of the Bastille was killed and the prisoners released –
though there were only seven of them. Yet the Bastille was hated by all,
because it stood for the despotic power of the king. The fortress was
demolished and its stone fragments were sold in the markets to all
those who wished to keep a souvenir of its destruction.

T h T eh e

French

F rR e ev o l unt i ocn h

The days that followed saw more rioting both in Paris and the
countryside. Most people were protesting against the high price of bread.
Much later, when historians looked back upon this time, they saw it as
the beginning of a chain of events that ultimately led to the execution
of the king in France, though most people at the time did not anticipate
this outcome. How and why did this happen?

Fig.1 – Storming of the Bastille.
Soon after the demolition of the Bastille,
artists made prints commemorating the event.

3
2020-21

1 French Society During the Late Eighteenth Century
In 1774, Louis XVI of the Bourbon family of kings ascended the
throne of France. He was 20 years old and married to the Austrian
princess Marie Antoinette. Upon his accession the new king found
an empty treasury. Long years of war had drained the financial
resources of France. Added to this was the cost of maintaining an
extravagant court at the immense palace of Versailles. Under Louis
XVI, France helped the thirteen American colonies to gain their
independence from the common enemy, Britain. The war added more
than a billion livres to a debt that had already risen to more than 2
billion livres. Lenders who gave the state credit, now began to charge
10 per cent interest on loans. So the French government was obliged
to spend an increasing percentage of its budget on interest payments
alone. To meet its regular expenses, such as the cost of maintaining
an army, the court, running government offices or universities, the
state was forced to increase taxes. Yet even this measure would not
have sufficed. French society in the eighteenth century was divided
into three estates, and only members of the third estate paid taxes.

India and the Contemporary World

The society of estates was part of the feudal system that dated back to
the middle ages. The term Old Regime is usually used to describe the
society and institutions of France before 1789.
Fig. 2 shows how the system of estates in French society was organised.
Peasants made up about 90 per cent of the population. However,
only a small number of them owned the land they cultivated. About
60 per cent of the land was owned by nobles, the Church and other
richer members of the third estate. The members of the first two
estates, that is, the clergy and the nobility, enjoyed certain privileges by
birth. The most important of these was exemption from paying taxes to
the state. The nobles further enjoyed feudal privileges. These included
feudal dues, which they extracted from the peasants. Peasants were obliged
to render services to the lord – to work in his house and fields – to serve
in the army or to participate in building roads.
The Church too extracted its share of taxes called tithes from the peasants,
and finally, all members of the third estate had to pay taxes to the state.
These included a direct tax, called taille, and a number of indirect taxes
which were levied on articles of everyday consumption like salt or tobacco.
The burden of financing activities of the state through taxes was borne
by the third estate alone.
4
2020-21

1st estate
Clergy

2nd estate
Nobility

3rd estate
Big businessmen,
merchants, court
officials, lawyers etc.
Peasants and
artisans
Small peasants,
landless labour,
servants

Fig.2 – A Society of Estates.
Note that within the Third Estate some were
rich and others poor.

New words
Livre – Unit of currency in France,
discontinued in 1794
Clergy – Group of persons invested with
special functions in the church
Tithe – A tax levied by the church, comprising
one-tenth of the agricultural produce
Taille – Tax to be paid directly to the state

‘This poor fellow brings everything,
grain, fruits, money, salad. The fat lord
sits there, ready to accept it all. He does
not even care to grace him with a look.’

Activity
Explain why the artist has portrayed the
nobleman as the spider and the peasant
as the fly.

‘The nobleman is the spider,
the peasant the fly.’

‘The more the devil has, the more he wants.’

Revolution

Fig.3 – The Spider and the Fly.
An anonymous etching.

New words
Subsistence crisis – An extreme situation where
the basic means of livelihood are endangered
Anonymous – One whose name remains
unknown

The

The population of France rose from about 23 million in 1715 to 28
million in 1789. This led to a rapid increase in the demand for
foodgrains. Production of grains could not keep pace with the
demand. So the price of bread which was the staple diet of the majority
rose rapidly. Most workers were employed as labourers in workshops
whose owner fixed their wages. But wages did not keep pace with
the rise in prices. So the gap between the poor and the rich widened.
Things became worse whenever drought or hail reduced the harvest.
This led to a subsistence crisis, something that occurred frequently
in France during the Old Regime.

French

1.1 The Struggle to Survive

5
2020-21

1.2 How a Subsistence Crisis Happens

Bad
harvest

The poorest can no
longer buy bread

Disease
epidemics

Fig.4 – The course of a subsistence crisis.

Activity
Fill in the blank boxes in Fig. 4 with

1.3 A Growing Middle Class Envisages an End to Privileges

India and the Contemporary World

In the past, peasants and workers had participated in revolts against
increasing taxes and food scarcity. But they lacked the means and
programmes to carry out full-scale measures that would bring about
a change in the social and economic order. This was left to those
groups within the third estate who had become prosperous and had
access to education and new ideas.
The eighteenth century witnessed the emergence of social groups,
termed the middle class, who earned their wealth through an
expanding overseas trade and from the manufacture of goods such as
woollen and silk textiles that were either exported or bought by the
richer members of society. In addition to merchants and
manufacturers, the third estate included professions such as lawyers
or administrative officials. All of these were educated and believed
that no group in society should be privileged by birth. Rather, a
person’s social position must depend on his merit. These ideas
envisaging a society based on freedom and equal laws and
opportunities for all, were put forward by philosophers such as John
Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau. In his Two Treatises of Government,
Locke sought to refute the doctrine of the divine and absolute right
6
2020-21

appropriate terms from among the following:
Food riots, scarcity of grain, increased
number of deaths, rising food prices,
weaker bodies.

of the monarch. Rousseau carried the idea forward, proposing a
form of government based on a social contract between people
and their representatives. In The Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu
proposed a division of power within the government between
the legislative, the executive and the judiciary. This model of
government was put into force in the USA, after the thirteen
colonies declared their independence from Britain. The American
constitution and its guarantee of individual rights was an important
example for political thinkers in France.
The ideas of these philosophers were discussed intensively in salons
and coffee-houses and spread among people through books and
newspapers. These were frequently read aloud in groups for the
benefit of those who could not read and write. The news that
Louis XVI planned to impose further taxes to be able to meet the
expenses of the state generated anger and protest against the system
of privileges.

Source A

Accounts of lived experiences in the Old Regime
1. Georges Danton, who later became active in revolutionary politics, wrote to a friend in
1793, looking back upon the time when he had just completed his studies:
‘I was educated in the residential college of Plessis. There I was in the company of
important men … Once my studies ended, I was left with nothing. I started looking for a
post. It was impossible to find one at the law courts in Paris. The choice of a career in the
army was not open to me as I was not a noble by birth, nor did I have a patron. The
church too could not offer me a refuge. I could not buy an office as I did not possess a
sou. My old friends turned their backs to me … the system had provided us with an
education without however offering a field where our talents could be utilised.’

French

Source

‘He who decides to be served and waited upon by slaves, ill-treated slaves at that, must
be fully aware that by doing so he is placing his property and his life in a situation which is
very different from that he would be in, had he chosen the services of free and welltreated men. And he who chooses to dine to the accompaniment of his victims’ groans,
should not complain if during a riot his daughter gets kidnapped or his son’s throat is slit.’

Revolution

2. An Englishman, Arthur Young, travelled through France during the years from 1787 to
1789 and wrote detailed descriptions of his journeys. He often commented on what he
saw.

What message is Young trying to convey here? Whom does he mean when he speaks of‘ ‘slaves’?

The

Activity

Who is he criticising? What dangers does he sense in the situation of 1787?

7
2020-21

2 The Outbreak of the Revolution
Louis XVI had to increase taxes for reasons you have learnt in the
previous section. How do you think he could have gone about doing
this? In France of the Old Regime the monarch did not have the
power to impose taxes according to his will alone. Rather he had to
call a meeting of the Estates General which would then pass his
proposals for new taxes. The Estates General was a political body to
which the three estates sent their representatives. However, the
monarch alone could decide when to call a meeting of this body. The
last time it was done was in 1614.

India and the Contemporary World

On 5 May 1789, Louis XVI called together an assembly of the Estates
General to pass proposals for new taxes. A resplendent hall in
Versailles was prepared to host the delegates. The first and second
estates sent 300 representatives each, who were seated in rows facing
each other on two sides, while the 600 members of the third estate
had to stand at the back. The third estate was represented by its more
prosperous and educated members. Peasants, artisans and women
were denied entry to the assembly. However, their grievances and
demands were listed in some 40,000 letters which the representatives
had brought with them.
Voting in the Estates General in the past had been conducted according
to the principle that each estate had one vote. This time too Louis
XVI was determined to continue the same practice. But members of
the third estate demanded that voting now be conducted by the
assembly as a whole, where each member would have one vote. This
was one of the democratic principles put forward by philosophers
like Rousseau in his book The Social Contract. When the king rejected
this proposal, members of the third estate walked out of the assembly
in protest.
The representatives of the third estate viewed themselves as spokesmen
for the whole French nation. On 20 June they assembled in the hall
of an indoor tennis court in the grounds of Versailles. They declared
themselves a National Assembly and swore not to disperse till they
had drafted a constitution for France that would limit the powers of
the monarch. They were led by Mirabeau and Abbé Sieyès. Mirabeau
was born in a noble family but was convinced of the need to do away
with a society of feudal privilege. He brought out a journal and
delivered powerful speeches to the crowds assembled at Versailles.
8
2020-21

Some important dates
1774
Louis XVI becomes king of France, faces
empty treasury and growing discontent
within society of the Old Regime.
1789
Convocation of Estates General, Third
Estate forms National Assembly, the
Bastille is stormed, peasant revolts in the
countryside.
1791
A constitution is framed to limit the powers
of the king and to guarantee basic rights to
all human beings.
1792-93
France becomes a republic, the king is
beheaded.
Overthrow of the Jacobin republic, a
Directory rules France.
1804
Napoleon becomes emperor of France,
annexes large parts of Europe.
1815
Napoleon defeated at Waterloo.

Activity
Representatives of the Third Estate take the
oath raising their arms in the direction of
Bailly, the President of the Assembly,
standing on a table in the centre. Do you
think that during the actual event Bailly
would have stood with his back to the
assembled deputies? What could have
been David’s intention in placing Bailly
(Fig.5) the way he has done?

Fig.5 – The Tennis Court Oath.
Preparatory sketch for a large painting by Jacques-Louis David. The painting was intended to be hung in the National Assembly.

Abbé Sieyès, originally a priest, wrote an influential pamphlet called
‘What is the Third Estate’?

Fig.6 – The spread of the Great Fear.
The map shows how bands of peasants spread
from one point to another.

New words
Chateau (pl. chateaux) – Castle or stately
residence belonging to a king or a nobleman
Manor – An estate consisting of the lord’s
lands and his mansion
9

2020-21

French

Faced with the power of his revolting subjects, Louis XVI finally
accorded recognition to the National Assembly and accepted the
principle that his powers would from now on be checked by a
constitution. On the night of 4 August 1789, the Assembly passed a
decree abolishing the feudal system of obligations and taxes. Members
of the clergy too were forced to give up their privileges. Tithes were
abolished and lands owned by the Church were confiscated. As a
result, the government acquired assets worth at least 2 billion livres.

Regions not affected by the Great Fear
Areas of agrarian revolt early 1789
Epicentres of main panic movements
The spread of the Great Fear

The

In the countryside rumours spread from village to village that the
lords of the manor had hired bands of brigands who were on their
way to destroy the ripe crops. Caught in a frenzy of fear, peasants in
several districts seized hoes and pitchforks and attacked chateaux.
They looted hoarded grain and burnt down documents containing
records of manorial dues. A large number of nobles fled from their
homes, many of them migrating to neighbouring countries.

Revolution

While the National Assembly was busy at Versailles drafting a
constitution, the rest of France seethed with turmoil. A severe winter
had meant a bad harvest; the price of bread rose, often bakers exploited
the situation and hoarded supplies. After spending hours in long
queues at the bakery, crowds of angry women stormed into the
shops. At the same time, the king ordered troops to move into Paris.
On 14 July, the agitated crowd stormed and destroyed the Bastille.

2.1 France Becomes a Constitutional Monarchy
The National Assembly completed the draft of the constitution in
1791. Its main object was to limit the powers of the monarch. These
powers instead of being concentrated in the hands of one person,
were now separated and assigned to different institutions – the
legislature, executive and judiciary. This made France a constitutional
monarchy. Fig. 7 explains how the new political system worked.

Judiciary

Executive

Judge

King

Legislature
CONTROL
National Assembly (745 members)
VETO

Ministers

OL
TR
N
CO

VOTE
Electors (50,000 men)

V
O
T
E
VOTE
Active citizens: entitled to vote. About 4 million of a
population of 28 million
Passive citizens: no voting rights. About 3 million men

Women, children and youth below 25.

India and the Contemporary World

Fig.7 – The Political sytstem under the Constitution of 1791.

The Constitution of 1791 vested the power to make laws in the
National Assembly, which was indirectly elected. That is, citizens
voted for a group of electors, who in turn chose the Assembly. Not
all citizens, however, had the right to vote. Only men above 25 years
of age who paid taxes equal to at least 3 days of a labourer’s wage
were given the status of active citizens, that is, they were entitled to
vote. The remaining men and all women were classed as passive
citizens. To qualify as an elector and then as a member of the Assembly,
a man had to belong to the highest bracket of taxpayers.
10
2020-21

Fig.8 – The Declaration of the Rights of Man
and Citizen, painted by the artist Le Barbier in
1790. The figure on the right represents France.
The figure on the left symbolises the law.

Source C
The Declaration of Rights of Man and
Citizen
1. Men are born and remain free and equal
in rights.
2. The aim of every political association is
the preservation of the natural and
inalienable rights of man; these are liberty,
property, securi ty and resistance to
oppression.

The Constitution began with a Declaration of the Rights of Man
and Citizen. Rights such as the right to life, freedom of speech,
freedom of opinion, equality before law, were established as ‘natural
and inalienable’ rights, that is, they belonged to each human being
by birth and could not be taken away. It was the duty of the state to
protect each citizen’s natural rights.

Source B

3. The source of all sovereignty resides in
the nation; no group or individual may
exercise authority that does not come
from the people.
4. Liberty consists of the power to do
whatever is not injurious to others.
5. The law has the right to forbid only
actions that are injurious to society.
6. Law is the expression of the general
will. All citizens have the right to participate
in its formation, personally or through their
representatives. All citizens are equal
before it.

The revolutionary journalist Jean-Paul
Marat commented in his newspaper
L’Ami du peuple (The friend of the
people) on the Constitution drafted by
the National Assembly:

Revolution

7. No man may be accused, arrested or
detained, except in cases determined by
the law.
11. Every citizen may speak, write and print
freely; he must take responsibility for the
abuse of such liberty in cases determined
by the law.

Source: An extract from the newspaper L’Ami du peuple.

French

12. For the maintenance of the public
force and for the expenses of
administration a common tax is
indispensable; it must be assessed equally
on all citizens in proportion to their means.
17. Since property is a sacred and inviolable
right, no one may be deprived of it, unless
a legally established public necessity
requires it. In that case a just
compensation must be given in advance.

The

‘The task of representing the people
has been given to the rich … the lot of
the poor and oppressed will never be
improved by peaceful means alone. Here
we have absolute proof of how wealth
influences the law. Yet laws will last only as long as the people
agree to obey them. And when they have managed to cast off
the yoke of the aristocrats, they will do the same to the other
owners of wealth.’

11
2020-21

Box 1

Reading political symbols
The majority of men and women in the eighteenth century could not read or write. So images and symbols
were frequently used instead of printed words to communicate important ideas. The painting by Le Barbier
(Fig. 8) uses many such symbols to convey the content of the Declaration of Rights. Let us try to read
these symbols.
The broken chain: Chains were used to fetter slaves.
A broken chain stands for the act of becoming free.

The bundle of rods or fasces: One rod
can be easily broken, but not an entire
bundle. Strength lies in unity.

India and the Contemporary World

The eye within a triangle radiating light: The allseeing eye stands for knowledge. The rays of the sun
will drive away the clouds of ignorance.

Sceptre: Symbol of royal power.

Snake biting its tail to form a ring: Symbol of
Eternity. A ring has neither beginning nor end.

12
2020-21

Red Phrygian cap: Cap worn by a slave
upon becoming free.

Blue-white-red: The
national colours of France.

Activity
1. Identify the symbols in Box 1 which stand
for liberty, equality and fraternity.
2. Explain the meaning of the painting of the
Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen
(Fig. 8) by reading only the symbols.
3. Compare the political rights which the
Constitution of 1791 gave to the citizens
with Articles 1 and 6 of the Declaration
(Source C). Are the two documents
consistent? Do the two documents convey

Revolution

the same idea?

The winged woman:
Personification of the law.

4. Which groups of French society would have
gained from the Constitution of 1791?
Which groups would have had reason to
be dissatisfied? What developments does

The Law Tablet: The law is the same for all,
and all are equal before it.

French

Marat (Source B) anticipate in the future?
5. Imagine the impact of the events in France
on neighbouring countries such as Prussia,

The

Austria-Hungary or Spain, all of which were
absolute monarchies. How would the kings,
traders, peasants, nobles or members of
the clergy here have reacted to the news of
what was happening in France?

13
2020-21

3 France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
The situation in France continued to be tense during the following years.
Although Louis XVI had signed the Constitution, he entered into secret
negotiations with the King of Prussia. Rulers of other neighbouring
countries too were worried by the developments in France and made
plans to send troops to put down the events that had been taking place
there since the summer of 1789. Before this could happen, the National
Assembly voted in April 1792 to declare war against Prussia and Austria.
Thousands of volunteers thronged from the provinces to join the army.
They saw this as a war of the people against kings and aristocracies all
over Europe. Among the patriotic songs they sang was the Marseillaise,
composed by the poet Roget de L’Isle. It was sung for the first time by
volunteers from Marseilles as they marched into Paris and so got its
name. The Marseillaise is now the national anthem of France.

India and the Contemporary World

The revolutionary wars brought losses and economic difficulties
to the people. While the men were away fighting at the front,
women were left to cope with the tasks of earning a living and
looking after their families. Large sections of the population were
convinced that the revolution had to be carried further, as the
Constitution of 1791 gave political rights only to the richer sections
of society. Political clubs became an important rallying point for
people who wished to discuss government policies and plan their
own forms of action. The most successful of these clubs was that of
the Jacobins, which got its name from the former convent of St
Jacob in Paris. Women too, who had been active throughout this
period, formed their own clubs. Section 4 of this chapter will tell
you more about their activities and demands.
The members of the Jacobin club belonged mainly to the less
prosperous sections of society. They included small shopkeepers,
artisans such as shoemakers, pastry cooks, watch-makers, printers,
as well as servants and daily-wage workers. Their leader was
Maximilian Robespierre. A large group among the Jacobins decided
to start wearing long striped trousers similar to those worn by
dock workers. This was to set themselves apart from the fashionable
sections of society, especially nobles, who wore knee breeches. It
New words
Convent – Building belonging to a community devoted to a
religious life
14
2020-21

Fig.9 – A sans-culottes couple.

Fig.10 – Nanine Vallain, Liberty.
This is one of the rare paintings by a woman artist.
The revolutionary events made it possible for
women to train with established painters and to
exhibit their works in the Salon, which was an
exhibition held every two years.
The painting is a female allegory of liberty – that
is, the female form symbolises the idea of freedom.

Activity
Look carefully at the painting and identify the
objects which are political symbols you saw in
Box 1 (broken chain, red cap, fasces, Charter
of the Declaration of Rights). The pyramid
stands for equality, often represented by a
triangle. Use the symbols to interpret the
painting. Describe your impressions of the
female figure of liberty.

Revolution

was a way of proclaiming the end of the power wielded by the
wearers of knee breeches. These Jacobins came to be known as the
sans-culottes, literally meaning ‘those without knee breeches’. Sansculottes men wore in addition the red cap that symbolised liberty.
Women however were not allowed to do so.

The

French

In the summer of 1792 the Jacobins planned an insurrection of a
large number of Parisians who were angered by the short supplies
and high prices of food. On the morning of August 10 they stormed
the Palace of the Tuileries, massacred the king’s guards and held
the king himself as hostage for several hours. Later the Assembly
voted to imprison the royal family. Elections were held. From now
on all men of 21 years and above, regardless of wealth, got the right
to vote.
The newly elected assembly was called the Convention. On
21 September 1792 it abolished the monarchy and declared France
a republic. As you know, a republic is a form of government where
the people elect the government including the head of the
15
2020-21

government. There is no hereditary monarchy. You can try and
find out about some other countries that are republics and investigate
when and how they became so.

New words
Treason – Betrayal of one’s country or
government

Louis XVI was sentenced to death by a court on the charge of
treason. On 21 January 1793 he was executed publicly at the
Place de la Concorde. The queen Marie Antoinette met with the
same fate shortly after.

3.1 The Reign of Terror
The period from 1793 to 1794 is referred to as the Reign of
Terror. Robespierre followed a policy of severe control and
punishment. All those whom he saw as being ‘enemies’ of the Source D
republic – ex-nobles and clergy, members of other political
parties, even members of his own party who did not agree with
What is liberty? Two conflicting views:
his methods – were arrested, imprisoned and then tried by a
The revolutionary journalist Camille
Desmoulins wrote the following in 1793. He
revolutionary tribunal. If the court found them ‘guilty’ they
was executed shortly after, during the Reign
were guillotined. The guillotine is a device consisting of two
of Terror.
poles and a blade with which a person is beheaded. It was named
‘Some people believe that Liberty is like a
after Dr Guillotin who invented it.
child, which needs to go through a phase of

India and the Contemporary World

Robespierre’s government issued laws placing a maximum ceiling
on wages and prices. Meat and bread were rationed. Peasants
were forced to transport their grain to the cities and sell it at
prices fixed by the government. The use of more expensive white
flour was forbidden; all citizens were required to eat the pain
d’égalité (equality bread), a loaf made of wholewheat. Equality
was also sought to be practised through forms of speech and
address. Instead of the traditional Monsieur (Sir) and Madame
(Madam) all French men and women were henceforth Citoyen
and Citoyenne (Citizen). Churches were shut down and their
buildings converted into barracks or offices.
Robespierre pursued his policies so relentlessly that even his
supporters began to demand moderation. Finally, he was
convicted by a court in July 1794, arrested and on the next day
sent to the guillotine.

Activity
Compare the views of Desmoulins and Robespierre. How does
each one understand the use of state force? What does
Robespierre mean by ‘the war of liberty against tyranny’? How
does Desmoulins perceive liberty? Refer once more to Source C.
What did the constitutional laws on the rights of individuals lay
down? Discuss your views on the subject in class.

16
2020-21

being disciplined before it attains maturity.
Quite the opposite. Liberty is Happiness,
Reason, Equality, Justice, it is the Declaration
of Rights … You would like to finish off all
your enemies by guillotining them. Has
anyone heard of something more senseless?
Would it be possible to bring a single person
to the scaffold without making ten more
enemies among his relations and friends?’
On 7 February 1794,
Robespierre made a
speech
at
the
Convention, which was
then carried by the
newspaper Le Moniteur
Universel . Here is an
extract from it:
‘To establish and consolidate democracy, to
achieve the peaceful rule of constitutional
laws, we must first finish the war of liberty
against tyranny …. We must annihilate the
enemies of the republic at home and abroad,
or else we shall perish. In time of Revolution
a democratic government may rely on terror.
Terror is nothing but justice, swift, severe
and inflexible; … and is used to meet the
most urgent needs of the fatherland. To curb
the enemies of Liberty through terror is the
right of the founder of the Republic.’

Fig.11 – The revolutionary government sought to mobilise the loyalty of its subjects through various means – one of
them was the staging of festivals like this one. Symbols from civilisations of ancient Greece and Rome were used to convey
the aura of a hallowed history. The pavilion on the raised platform in the middle carried by classical columns was made of
perishable material that could be dismantled. Describe the groups of people, their clothes, their roles and actions. What
impression of a revolutionary festival does this image convey?

3.2 A Directory Rules France

French

Revolution

The fall of the Jacobin government allowed the wealthier middle
classes to seize power. A new constitution was introduced which
denied the vote to non-propertied sections of society. It provided
for two elected legislative councils. These then appointed a Directory,
an executive made up of five members. This was meant as a safeguard
against the concentration of power in a one-man executive as under
the Jacobins. However, the Directors often clashed with the legislative
councils, who then sought to dismiss them. The political instability
of the Directory paved the way for the rise of a military dictator,
Napoleon Bonaparte.

The

Through all these changes in the form of government, the ideals of
freedom, of equality before the law and of fraternity remained inspiring
ideals that motivated political movements in France and the rest of Europe
during the following century.

17
2020-21

4 Did Women have a Revolution?

India and the Contemporary World

Fig.12 – Parisian women on their way to Versailles.
This print is one of the many pictorial representations of the events of 5 October 1789, when women marched to Versailles
and brought the king back with them to Paris.

From the very beginning women were active participants in the events
which brought about so many important changes in French society.
They hoped that their involvement would pressurise the revolutionary
government to introduce measures to improve their lives. Most
women of the third estate had to work for a living. They worked as
seamstresses or laundresses, sold flowers, fruits and vegetables at the
market, or were employed as domestic servants in the houses of
prosperous people. Most women did not have access to education or
job training. Only daughters of nobles or wealthier members of the
third estate could study at a convent, after which their families
arranged a marriage for them. Working women had also to care for
their families, that is, cook, fetch water, queue up for bread and
look after the children. Their wages were lower than those of men.
In order to discuss and voice their interests women started their own
political clubs and newspapers. About sixty women’s clubs came up
in different French cities. The Society of Revolutionary and
Republican Women was the most famous of them. One of their
18
2020-21

Activity
Describe the persons represented in
Fig. 12 – their actions, their postures, the
objects they are carrying. Look carefully to
see whether all of them come from the
same social group. What symbols has the
artist included in the image? What do they
stand for? Do the actions of the women
reflect traditional ideas of how women
were expected to behave in public? What
do you think: does the artist sympathise
with the women’s activities or is he critical
of them? Discuss your views in the class.

main demands was that women enjoy the same political rights as
men. Women were disappointed that the Constitution of 1791 reduced
them to passive citizens. They demanded the right to vote, to be
elected to the Assembly and to hold political office. Only then, they
felt, would their interests be represented in the new government.
In the early years, the revolutionary government did introduce laws
that helped improve the lives of women. Together with the creation
of state schools, schooling was made compulsory for all girls. Their
fathers could no longer force them into marriage against their will.
Marriage was made into a contract entered into freely and registered
under civil law. Divorce was made legal, and could be applied for by
both women and men. Women could now train for jobs, could
become artists or run small businesses.
Women’s struggle for equal political rights, however, continued.
During the Reign of Terror, the new government issued laws ordering
closure of women’s clubs and banning their political activities. Many
prominent women were arrested and a number of them executed.
Women’s movements for voting rights and equal wages continued
through the next two hundred years in many countries of the world.
The fight for the vote was carried out through an international
suffrage movement during the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. The example of the political activities of French women
during the revolutionary years was kept alive as an inspiring memory.
It was finally in 1946 that women in France won the right to vote.

Source E
Revolution

The life of a revolutionary woman – Olympe de Gouges
(1748-1793)

The

French

Olympe de Gouges was one of the most important of the politically
active women in revolutionary France. She protested against the
Constitution and the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen as
they excluded women from basic rights that each human being was
entitled to. So, in 1791, she wrote a Declaration of the Rights of
Woman and Citizen, which she addressed to the Queen and to the
members of the National Assembly, demanding that they act upon
it. In 1793, Olympe de Gouges criticised the Jacobin government
for forcibly closing down women’s clubs. She was tried by the
National Convention, which charged her with treason. Soon after
this she was executed.

19
2020-21

Source F
Some of the basic rights set forth in Olympe de Gouges’
Declaration.
1. Woman is born free and remains equal to man in rights.
2. The goal of all political associations is the preservation of the natural
rights of woman and man: These rights are liberty, property, security,
and above all resistance to oppression.
3. The source of all sovereignty resides in the nation, which is nothing
but the union of woman and man.
4. The law should be the expression of the general will; all female and
male citizens should have a say either personally or by their
representatives in its formulation; it should be the same for all. All
female and male citizens are equally entitled to all honours
and public employment according to their abilities and without any
other distinction than that of their talents.
5. No woman is an exception; she is accused, arrested, and detained in
cases determined by law. Women, like men, obey this rigorous law.

Activity
Compare the manifesto drafted by Olympe de
Gouges (Source F) with the Declaration of the
Rights of Man and Citizen (Source C).

Source G
In 1793, the Jacobin politician Chaumette
sought to justify the closure of women’s
clubs on the following grounds:

India and the Contemporary World

‘Has Nature entrusted domestic duties to
men? Has she given us breasts to nurture
babies?
No.
She said to Man:
Be a man. Hunting, agriculture, political duties
… that is your kingdom.

Fig.13 – Women queuing up at a bakery.

She said to Woman:
Be a woman … the things of the household,
the sweet duties of motherhood – those
are your tasks.

Activity
Imagine yourself to be one of the women in Fig. 13. Formulate a
response to the arguments put forward by Chaumette (Source G).

20
2020-21

Shameless are those women, who wish to
become men. Have not duties been fairly
distributed?’

5 The Abolition of Slavery

Throughout the eighteenth century there was little criticism of slavery
in France. The National Assembly held long debates about whether
the rights of man should be extended to all French subjects including
those in the colonies. But it did not pass any laws, fearing opposition
from businessmen whose incomes depended on the slave trade. It
was finally the Convention which in 1794 legislated to free all slaves
in the French overseas possessions. This, however, turned out to be
a short-term measure: ten years later, Napoleon reintroduced slavery.
Plantation owners understood their freedom as including the right
to enslave African Negroes in pursuit of their economic interests.
Slavery was finally abolished in French colonies in 1848.

Fig.14 – The emancipation of slaves.
This print of 1794 describes the emancipation
of slaves. The tricolour banner on top carries
the slogan: ‘The rights of man’. The
inscription below reads: ‘The freedom of the
unfree’. A French woman prepares to ‘civilise’
the African and American Indian slaves by
giving them European clothes to wear.

Activity
New words

Revolution

One of the most revolutionary social reforms of the Jacobin regime
was the abolition of slavery in the French colonies. The colonies in
the Caribbean – Martinique, Guadeloupe and San Domingo – were
important suppliers of commodities such as tobacco, indigo, sugar
and coffee. But the reluctance of Europeans to go and work in distant
and unfamiliar lands meant a shortage of labour on the plantations.
So this was met by a triangular slave trade between Europe, Africa
and the Americas. The slave trade began in the seventeenth century.
French merchants sailed from the ports of Bordeaux or Nantes to
the African coast, where they bought slaves from local chieftains.
Branded and shackled, the slaves were packed tightly into ships for
the three-month long voyage across the Atlantic to the Caribbean.
There they were sold to plantation owners. The exploitation of slave
labour made it possible to meet the growing demand in European
markets for sugar, coffee, and indigo. Port cities like Bordeaux and
Nantes owed their economic prosperity to the flourishing slave trade.

French

Record your impressions of this print
(Fig. 14). Describe the objects lying on the
ground. What do they symbolise? What
attitude does the picture express towards
non-European slaves?

The

Negroes – A term used for the indigenous people of Africa
south of the Sahara. It is a derogatory term not in common use
any longer
Emancipation – The act of freeing

21
2020-21

6 The Revolution and Everyday Life
Can politics change the clothes people wear, the language they speak
or the books they read? The years following 1789 in France saw many
such changes in the lives of men, women and children. The
revolutionary governments took it upon themselves to pass laws that
would translate the ideals of liberty and equality into everyday practice.

India and the Contemporary World

One important law that came into effect soon after the storming of
the Bastille in the summer of 1789 was the abolition of censorship. In
the Old Regime all written material and cultural activities – books,
newspapers, plays – could be published or performed only after they
had been approved by the censors of the king. Now the Declaration
of the Rights of Man and Citizen proclaimed freedom of speech and
expression to be a natural right. Newspapers, pamphlets, books and
printed pictures flooded the towns of France from where they
travelled rapidly into the countryside. They all described and discussed
the events and changes taking place in France. Freedom of the press
also meant that opposing views of events could be expressed. Each
side sought to convince the others of its position through the medium
of print. Plays, songs and festive processions attracted large numbers
of people. This was one way they could grasp and identify with ideas
such as liberty or justice that political philosophers wrote about at
length in texts which only a handful of educated people could read.

Fig.15 – The patriotic fat-reducing press.
This anonymous print of 1790 seeks to make the idea of justice tangible.

22
2020-21

Activity
Describe the picture in your own words. What
are the images that the artist has used to
communicate the following ideas: greed,
equality, justice, takeover by the state of the
assets of the church?

Fig.16 - Marat addressing the people. This is a painting by Louis-Leopold Boilly.
Recall what you have learnt about Marat in this chapter. Describe the scene around him. Account for his great popularity.
What kinds of reactions would a painting like this produce among viewers in the Salon?

Conclusion

French
The

The ideas of liberty and democratic rights were the most important
legacy of the French Revolution. These spread from France to the
rest of Europe during the nineteenth century, where feudal systems

Revolution

In 1804, Napoleon Bonaparte crowned himself Emperor of France.
He set out to conquer neighbouring European countries, dispossessing
dynasties and creating kingdoms where he placed members of his family.
Napoleon saw his role as a moderniser of Europe. He introduced many
laws such as the protection of private property and a uniform system of
weights and measures provided by the decimal system. Initially, many
saw Napoleon as a liberator who would bring freedom for the people.
But soon the Napoleonic armies came to be viewed everywhere as an
invading force. He was finally defeated at Waterloo in 1815. Many of his
measures that carried the revolutionary ideas of liberty and modern laws
to other parts of Europe had an impact on people long after Napoleon
had left.

Fig.17 – Napoleon crossing the Alps, painting
by David.

23
2020-21

were abolished. Colonised peoples reworked the idea of freedom from
bondage into their movements to create a sovereign nation state. Tipu
Sultan and Rammohan Roy are two examples of individuals who
responded to the ideas coming from revolutionary France.

Box 2
Raja Rammohan Roy was one of those who
was inspired by new ideas that were spreading
through Europe at that time. The French
Revolution and later, the July Revolution excited
his imagination.
‘He could think and talk of nothing else when he
heard of the July Revolution in France in 1830.
On his way to England at Cape Town he insisted
on visiting frigates (warships) flying the
revolutionary tri-colour flag though he had been
temporarily lamed by an accident.’
Susobhan Sarkar, Notes on the Bengal Renaissance 1946.

Activities

2. The French Revolution saw the rise of newspapers describing the events of
each day and week. Collect information and pictures on any one event and
write a newspaper article. You could also conduct an imaginary interview
with important personages such as Mirabeau, Olympe de Gouges or
Robespierre. Work in groups of two or three. Each group could then put up
their articles on a board to produce a wallpaper on the French Revolution.

Activities

1. Find out more about any one of the revolutionary figures you have read
about in this chapter. Write a short biography of this person.

Questions

India and the Contemporary World

1. Describe the circumstances leading to the outbreak of revolutionary protest
in France.
2. Which groups of French society benefited from the revolution? Which
groups were forced to relinquish power? Which sections of society would
have been disappointed with the outcome of the revolution?
3. Describe the legacy of the French Revolution for the peoples of the world
during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
4. Draw up a list of democratic rights we enjoy today whose origins could be
traced to the French Revolution.
5. Would you agree with the view that the message of universal rights was
beset with contradictions? Explain.
6. How would you explain the rise of Napoleon?

24
2020-21

?

