Short Answer Type Questions-II
Q.1. Distinguish between : (i) Left lung and Right lung, (ii) Aquatic and Terrestrial
respiration.
Ans. (i) Differences between Right lung and Left lung :
S. No.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Left lung
It consists of two lobes.
Left lung is lighter (567 gm), smaller and
narrower.
Cardiac notch is present along the inner
border of the lung.

Right lung
It consists of three lobes.
Right lung is heavier (625 gm), longer
and broader.
Cardiac notch is absent in right lungs.

(ii) Differences between Aquatic and Terrestrial respiration:
S. No.
(i)

Aquatic respiration
It occurs mainly through gills and moist
body wall.

Terrestrial respiration
It occurs mainly through the lungs. (In
insects by trachea).

(ii)

The oxygen is absorbed from the water.

The inhalation of oxygen occurs from
the atmosphere.

(iii)

Respiratory pigments and process of
respiratory exchange between the
internal medium and tissues are not well
developed.

The respiratory pigments and the
process of respiratory exchange
between the internal medium and
tissues are well developed.

Q. 2. Write the differences between pharynx and larynx.
Ans. Differences between Pharynx and Larynx:
S. No.
(i)

Pharynx
Vertical tube lying between cranial base
and middle of neck.

Larynx
Box like structure which occurs in
the upper part of neck called sound
box.

(ii)

It is seldom closed.

Closed during swallowing process.

(iii)

Has a number of openings like internal
nares, gullet, glottis, eustachian tubes,
buccal cavity.

Only two openings, one connected
with pharynx (glottis) while the other
leads into trachea.

(iv)

Little difference in the growth of pharynx
between male and female puberty.
(Any three)

After puberty, males show higher
growth of larynx than female.

Q. 3. Why does it become difficult to breathe at high altitudes ?
Ans. At high altitudes, the concentration of oxygen becomes less. At a height of about
15,000 feet or more, the pressure also decreases along with a decrease in the oxygen

content. Persons reaching such heights are unable to get the amount of oxygen required for
proper functioning of their body. Due to this, sufficient oxygen does not diffuse into the blood,
as a result of which the person suffers from nausea, headache and delusion. As a result he
finds it difficult to breathe.
Q. 4. Why do you breathe faster while running ?
Ans. The metabolism of food increases due to the supply of more energy to the body, while
running. Due to this process more carbon dioxide is added into the blood and its
concentration in the blood is increased above normal, which stimulates the respiratory centre
in the brain. The respiratory centre sends the stimulus to the muscles of ribs and diaphragm
through the nerves for faster and deeper respiration. Thus we breathe faster during running
or hard physical work.
Q. 5. CO 2 is carried by haemoglobin as carbamino.

(DDE 2017)

Ans. Haemoglobin (about 20-25 percent). This binding is related to the PCO 2 pO2 is a major
factor which affect this binding. When pCO 2 is high and pO2 is low as in tissues, more binding
of carbon dioxide occurs whereas, when the PCO 2 is low and PO 2 is high as in the alveoli,
dissociation of CO 2 from carbamino-haemoglobin takes place. The CO 2 is now delivered at
the alveoli.
Q. 6. How is oxygen transported in the blood and released in the tissues ?
2009]

[NCT-

Ans. (i) Blood carries oxygen from the lungs to the heart and from the heart to various body
parts.
(ii) About 3 % of oxygen in the blood is dissolved in the plasma which carries oxygen to the
body cells.
(iii) About 97% of oxygen is carried in combination with haemoglobin of the erythrocytes.
(iv) The haem portion of haemoglobin contains four atoms of iron, each capable of combining
with a molecule of oxygen.
(v) Oxygen and haemoglobin combine in an easily reversible reaction to form oxyhaemoglobin
(HbO 2).

(vi) Under the high partial pressure, oxygen easily binds with haemoglobin in the pulmonary
(lung) blood capillaries.
(vii) When this oxygenated blood reaches the different tissues, the partial pressure of oxygen
declines and the bonds holding oxygen to haemoglobin become unstable.
(viii) As a result, oxygen is released from the blood capillaries.

Q. 7. What is the role of carbonic anhydrase ? Show by a series of reactions, how
carbonic anhydrase starts the reaction leading to the formation of haemoglobinic acid
(Н.НЬ) ?
OR
How is CO 2 transported from tissues to the lungs in human beings ?
[KVS-201213]
Ans. Carbonic Anhydrase : (i) CO 2 reacts with water in presence of carbonic anhydrase in
erythrocytes.
(ii) Carbonic acid (H2CO3) is dissociated into hydrogen (H+) and bicarbonate (HCO 3) ions.
(iii) Oxyhaemoglobin (HbO 2) of RBCs is weakly acidic and remain in association with K + ions
as KHbO2. H+ ions combine with haemoglobin.
(iv) Bicarbonate ions diffuse out into plasma and combine with haemoglobin to form
haemoglobinic acid (H.Hb).

Q. 8. How does exchange of respiratory gases takes place in the alveoli of lungs ?
[KVS-2008, NCT-2008] [NCT-2011]
Ans. (i) During uptake of air the partial pressure of oxygen and pCO 2 are 159 mm Hg and 0.3
mm Hg respectively.
(ii) There is already small amount of alveolar air in the lungs. This air contains less amount of
O2 and more CO 2 than the inspired air.
(iii) As this alveolar air mixes with the inspired air then O 2 counted and pO 2 of alveolar air
increases to 13.1% and 100 mm Hg whereas CO 2 content and pCO 2 is 5.3% and 40 mm Hg.
(iv) The pulmonary artery brings the deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs.
(v) The blood consist of lower pO 2 than alveolar pO 2.
(vi) In the lungs O2 diffuses into the blood from the alveolar air and pO2 which is 95 mm Hg
increases by 19.8%.
(vii) This oxygenated blood is taken away by the pulmonary vein.
(viii) This blood in alveolar capillaries contains pCO 2 which falls to 40 mm Hg.
(ix) In the alveoli of the lungs O 2 is taken up by vein and CO 2 is given out from blood through
artery.

Q. 9. How does gaseous exchange takes place in tissues ?
Ans. (i) Gaseous exchange initially takes place between the alveoli of lungs and blood
capillaries and finally between blood capillaries and tissues by a physical process called
diffusion.
(ii) The oxygenated blood from the lungs is carried to the heart for distribution to individual
body cells.
(iii) The blood reaching the tissue capillaries has pO2 of 95 mm Hg and pCO 2 of 40 mm Hg
while the cells has pO 2 of 20 and pCO 2 of 52 mm Hg.
(iv) Because of differences in partial pressures of blood and tissue cells, oxygen diffuses
from the blood into the cells, and carbon dioxide from the cells into the blood through tissue
fluid which acts as middle man.
(v) The final diffusion of gases in the tissues lowers the pO 2 of the blood and raises its pCO 2.
(vi) This process is called internal respiration or tissue respiration.
Q. 10. What is Respiratory Quotient ? Write R.Q. for carbohydrate, protein and fat.
[NCT-2010, 11]
Ans. Respiratory quotient is the ratio of the volume of carbon dioxide produced to the volume
of oxygen consumed over a period of time in respiration.
R. Q. =

Volume of CO2 evolved
Volume of CO2 absorbed

Respiratory quotient varies with different foods utilized in respiration.
(i) For glucose, R.Q. is 1
(ii) For fats it is about 0.7,
(iii) For proteins it is about 0.9 and for organic acids it is about 1.3 or 1.4.
Q. 11. Describe the role of red blood cells in the transport of oxygen and carbon
dioxide by blood.
Ans. Role of red blood cells in the transport of oxygen:
(i) Red blood cells are known as erythrocytes. They carry oxygen in the form of an unstable,
easily dissociable chemical combination with haemoglobin.
(ii) O 2 diffuse into RBCs and combines usually with haemoglobin to form oxyhaemoglobin.

(iii) In tissues oxyhaemoglobin dissociates into oxygen and deoxyhemoglobin at low partial
pressure.
(iv) The blood carries its full load to O 2 until it enters the capillaries in tissues to the lungs.

Role of red blood cells in the transport of CO 2 :
(i) Carbon dioxide is carried by RBCs. About 30% of CO2 is carried by RBC's from tissues to
the lungs.
(ii) CO 2 on entering the red blood cell loosely combines with the amino group of reduced Hb
and forms carbaminohemoglobin.

Q. 12. What is meant by chloride shift ? Where does it occur in human body ? What is
its utility ?
Ans. Chloride shift : The diffusion of Cl ions from blood plasma into the RBCs is known as
chloride shift. It occurs from plasma to RBCs (erythrocytes) in human body.
Utility of chloride shift: To maintain ionic balance and electrochemical neutrality.
Q. 13. Why vigorous exercise sometimes result in muscular pain?
Ans. Anaerobic respiration also occurs in some tissues of aerobically respiring animals, as
they do not get the required supply of oxygen at that time. Skeletal muscles produce lactic
acid from glucose during vigorous exercise, because they do not immediately get as much
oxygen as it is necessary for their work. This results in muscular pain.
Q. 14. What do you understand by artificial respiration ?
Ans. (i) Persons who have stopped breathing may be subjected to artificial respiration.
(ii) Most common method of artificial respiration is mouth to mouth breathing.
(iii) In this method, the operator lifts the patients neck by placing a hand below it. The
operator then closes the nostrils of the patient with fingers. The operator keeps his own
mouth in front of patient's mouth and blows air into the mouth of the patient, then he releases
the patients mouth to allow expiration by his lungs.
(iv) This procedure should be repeated 10-15 times per minute.
Q. 15. Explain how CO 2 produced during oxidation of carbohydrate in the muscles of
our heart is released into the atmosphere.
Ans. CO2 in the plasma is absorbed by RBC as a physical solution. It is transported as
carbonic acid, bicarbonates and carbonic haemoglobin. It is then carried to the heart and
from there it is taken to the pulmonary artery and then to the lungs. Dissociation takes place
in the alveoli and the CO 2 is finally, exhaled through the nostrils.
Q. 16. Why is haemoglobin called conjugated protein ? What happens to the molecule
at high and low partial pressure of oxygen ?
Ans. Haemoglobin is called conjugated protein because it consists of a basic protein globulin
and a non-protein called haem. The haemoglobin, when exposed to high partial pressure of

oxygen, combines with it to form oxyhaemoglobin, which carries four molecules of oxygen
loosely bound to the four Fe2+ ions. When this oxyhaemoglobin reaches the tissues where
there is low oxygen pressure, oxyhaemoglobin dissociates into oxygen and
deoxyhemoglobin.
Q. 17. What happens to the leg muscle of an athlete who runs a marathon race ?
Ans. While running a marathon race, the internal muscle respires anaerobically as they do
not get the required increased supply of oxygen at that time. This results in the deposition of
lactic acid in them. As a result of the lactic acid deposition, the leg muscles feel cramps.
Lactic acid, thus produced will be oxidised later by other tissues.
Q. 18. Write short notes on mountain sickness.
Ans. On mountain-tops about 8000ft. above from the sea level, one has difficulty in breathing
due to considerable decrease in the oxygen in the air. Consequently, the alveolar pO 2
reduces and oxygen cannot be diffused into the blood. Thus, the process of oxygenation of
blood progressively gets decreased to such an extent that the person develops mountain
sickness. It produces a number of symptoms like breathlessness, headache, dizziness,
nausea, vomiting and a bluishness of skin, nails and lips. This is because of lack of adequate
oxygen. People suffering from heart ailment or blood pressure should not go to such a
height.

