Short Answer Type Questions-II
Q.1. What are intestinal glands ? How many types of intestinal glands are there ?
Ans. Intestinal glands: These are formed by the surface epithelium of the small intestine.
Theseare of two types: Crypts of Lieberkuhn and Brunner's glands.
(i) (a) The crypts of Lieberkuhn are simple, tubular structure which occur throughout the small
intestine between the villi.
(b) They secrete digestive enzymes and mucus.
(c) The mucus is secreted by the goblet cells.
(d) These crypts have at the base paneth cells and argentaffin cells.
(ii) (a) The Brunner's glands are found only in the duodenum and are located in the submucosa.
(b) They secrete a little enzyme and mucus. (c) The mucus protects the duodenal wall from
getting digested. (d) Digestion of most of nutrients take place in the duodenum under the action
of various enzyme.
Q. 2. Stomach is the right place where hydrochloric acid is required to be secreted in the gastric
juice. Describe any three points to justify this statement.
Ans. (i) HCI inactivates the salivary amylase and prevents further breakdown of disaccharidecarbohydrate.
(ii) It kills micro-organisms and lowers the pH of stomach between 1.5-2.5 (very acidic).
(iii) Pepsinogen (inactive precursor of pepsin), does not possess any threat to stomach and in
presence of HCI it is converted into pepsin (principal protease of stomach).
Q.3. Describe various types of papillae found on tongue.
Ans. The upper surface of tongue has four types of papillae:
(i) Vallate or Circumvallate papillae: They are usually about 8-12 in number. Each vallate
papilla contains upto 100 taste buds. These papillae are the largest of four types of papillae.
(ii) Filliform papillae: They are smallest and most numerous of the four types. They are
conical. They are found mainly near the centre and most of the upper surface of tongue. These
papillae contain tactile (touch) receptors but not taste buds.
(iii) Fungiform papillae: They are much less numerous than the filliform papillae. They are
rounded but smaller than vallate but larger than filliform papillae. They are most numerous near
the tip of tongue and contains fire taste buds.
(iv) Foliate papillae: These are not well-developed in human tongue. These get degenerated in
early childhood.

Q.4. Amylase is secreted by two different glands. Name them What is the action of
amylase on food?
Ans. The two different glands that secrete amylase are salivery glands and pancreas. Amylase
hydrolyses starch into maltose, isomaltose and 𝑎-detrins.
Q.5. Identify the function of each of the enzyme given below. Also write the sources of
each of these enzymes.
(i) Trypsin
(ii) Maltase
(iii) Pepsin
Ans. (i) Trypsin: Trypsin is a proteolytic enzyme which converts peptones into dipeptides. in
small intestine. Pancreatic juice contains inactive trypsinogen. Trypsinogen is activated by
enzyme enterokinase into trypsin, which further activates
the other enzyme of intestinal juice.
(ii) Maltase: It converts maltose to glucose. It is present in succus entericus. Secretion from
brush border cells of mucosa and goblet cells contain enzyme succus entericus, containing
variety of enzymes to complete the process of digestion.
(iii) Prepsin: Pepsin is a proteolytic enzyme that which converts proteins to peptones. Gastric
cells are the source of Pepsin. Mucosa of stomach have gastric glands having three types of
cells : Mucus neck cells that secrete mucus, peptic or chief cells that secretes proenzyme
pepsinogen and parietal or oxyntic cells that secretes HCI. HCI activates the prepsinogen to
pepsin to digest protein.
Q.6. How is fat absorbed in small intestine?
[KVS 2013-14]
Ans. Absorption of fat:
(i) Digested fat is absorbed in the small intestine.
(ii) Fatty acids and glycerol being insoluble cannot be absorbed into the blood.
(iii) They are first incorporated into small droplets called micells which move into the intestinal
mucosa.
(iv) They are reformed into small coated fat globules called chylomicrons
Q. 7. Write notes on: (1) ulcers, and (2) constipation.
Ans. (i) Ulcers: (a) Under normal circumstances the presence of HCl in the stomach does not
harm the stomach epithelium as it remains protected by a layer of mucus secreted by the
goblets cells.
(b) The mucus being slightly alkaline neutralizes the HCl. But in certain persons, these
protective mechanisms are inadequate which leads to the erosions, termed as ulcers
(c) In some persons, presence of parasites in the alimentary canal also cause ulcers.

(ii) Constipation: (a) When a person does not pass regular stools he is supposed to suffer from
constipation.
(b) It is a condition in which defecation occurs only at prolonged intervals or it is inadequate
or irregular.
(c) Constipation may occur due to decreased motility, a diet containing less fluids, fibres or
too much adsorption of water by the colon.
Q.8. Write three enzymes secreted by pancreas Specify the substance and the product of
each.
Ans. Pancreas is a composite gland. It has exocrine and endocrine parts. The exocrine part
secrete pancreatic juice. It contains trypsin, amylopsin and steapsin.
(i) Trypsin: It converts proteins, peptones and proteoses into amino acids.
(ii) Amytases: It acts upon starch and converts them into soluble sugars.
(iii) Steapsin or lipase: It catalyzes the hydrolysis of fats to fatty acids and glycerol.
Q.9. How are the following enzymes activated in the alimentary canal? (i) pepsinogen
(ii) Carboxypeptidase, (iii prorennin, (iv) trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen.
Ans. (i) Pepsinogen: Pepsinogen becomes activated as soon as the food reaches the stomach
i.e., as soon as the secretion of HCI takes place. It acts most effectively within the pH range of
1.6-3.2.
(ii) PrCarboxypeptidase: Trypsin activates carboxy-peptidase.
(iii) Rennin: It is secreted as prorennin but HCl present in the gastric juice converts inactive
prorennin into active rennin.
(iv) Trypsinogen and Chymotrypsinogen: These are inactive enzymes until they come in
contact with enteropeptidase(intestinal enzyme) which converts them into active trypsin and
chymotrypsin.
Q. 10. Complete the following table:

[KVS 2012-13]

Enzyme

Substrate

Site of action

(a)…………….

Proteins

Stomach

Product after
digestion
Proteoses, peptones

Typsin

Proteoses & peptones

Duodenum

(b)…………….

Lipase

Fats

Small intestine

(c)…………….

(d)……………

Nucleotides

Small intestine

Nucleosides

Maltase

(e)……………….

Small intestine

Glucose

Dipeptidase

(f)……………….

Small intestine

Amino acids

Ans.
Enzyme

Substrate

Site of action

(a) Pepsin

Proteins

Stomach

Product after
digestion
Proteoses,peptones

Typsin

Proteoses &peptones

Duodenum

(b) Dipeptides

Lipase

Fats

Small intestine

(c) Fatty
acids+Glycerol

(d) Nucleotidase

Nucleotides

Small intestine

Nucleosides

Maltase

(e) Maltose

Small intestine

Glucose

Dipeptidase

(f) Dipeptides

Small intestine

Amino acids

Q. 11. You have eaten boiled rice for lunch. Make a list of enzymes that will act upon the
rice and the changes it will undergo before being absorbed in the small intestine.
Ans. Rice contains starch. The digestion of starch takes place in the mouth or buccal cavity.
The saliva contains salivary amylase enzyme, which converts about 30 percent of starch into
maltose, isomaltose and dextrin. The pancreatic juice also contains amylase, which acts upon
the remaining starch and changes it into glucose and fructose. The intestinal juice also acts
upon maltose, isomaltose and converts them into glucose.
Q.12. How does coagulation of milk in the alimentary canal take place ?
Ans. When milk reaches the stomach, protein digestion starts. Pepsin stimulates the digestion
of proteins in milk. HCI activates pepsinogen into pepsin. It hydrol ses soluble casein into
paracasein to make solid curd, i.e., coagulation of milk. Reinin, a milk coagulating enzyme is
secreted as pro-rennin but in presence of HCl it is hydrolysed into active rennin. Rennin
hydrolyses casein into paracasein to milk coagulation.
Q.13. How would it affect the digestion of proteins and carbohydrates in the duodenum
of a man, if there is a blockade in the pancreatic duct ? Explain.
Ans. When there is a blockage in the pancreatic duct there will be non availability of pancreatic
juice. The protease and amylase do not act on protein and carbohydrate in the duodenum. So
digestion of proteins and carbohydrates in the duodenunm of a man will not be seen.
Q.14. What are the digestive fluids added to the food in the duodenum? What is their
action ?
Ans. In the duodenum, pancreatic juice and bile juice are discharged by the pancreas and liver
respectively. The pancreatic juice is secreted by pancreas and is brought to the duodenum with
the help of pancreatic duct. Bile juice is secreted by liver cells. The pancreatic juice contains
three enzymes, they are,
(i) Trypsin: It converts peptones into peptides and polypeptides.
(ii) Amylase : It converts all digestible polysaccharides to disaccharides
(ii) Lipase : It converts fats to fatty acids and glycerol.

Q.15. How would non-secretion of hydrochloric acid in our stomach affect food digestion
? Explain.
Ans.
(i) In the absence of HCI (Hydrochloric acid), pepsinogen is not activated and converted into
pepsin.
(ii) Hence no protein digestion takes place.
(iii) It will not kill bacteria in the stomach (anti-septicaction).
Q.16. Name the cells that secrete mucus. What are the functions of mucus?
Ans. Goblet cells secrete mucus. They are found in mucosal epithelium and are called mucus
glands.
Functions of mucus:
(i) Mucus acts as lubricant.
(ii) It protects the epithelial surface from excoriation and digestion
Q.17. Why are many proteases released in an inactive. form?
Ans. The protein hydrolyzing enzymes are known as proteases. These proteases are secreted
in inactive form and are called proenzymes. If these are secreted in active form these
proenzymes would hydrolyze cellular and extra cellular proteins of the individual itself. Pepsin
and rennin are secreted in inactive forms - pepsinogen and prorennin. These are activated at
the sites of their action in stomach by optimal pH or by specific proteases.

