Short Answer Questions – I
Q. 1. What are uricotelic animals? Give two examples. [KVS Agra 2016]
Ans. Uricotelic animals: Animals which excrete urea as nitrogenous waste are called uricotelic
animals and the process is called uricotelism. E.g. Frog, man.
Q. 2. Mention four aspects in which uricotelism differs from ureotelism.
Ans. The four aspects in which uricotelism differs from ureotelism are:
(i) Uricotelism is excretion of uric acid whereas ureotelism is excretion of urea.
(ii) Uric acid is non-toxic whereas urea is less toxic.
(iii) Uric acid is insoluble in water whereas urea is soluble in water.
(iv) Uric acid can be excreted out in the form of crystals but urea does not form crystals.
Q. 3. Differentiate between peritubular capillaries and vasa recta?
Ans. The fine capillary network around the renal tubule formed by the efferent arteriole
emerging from the glomerulus are called peritubular capillaries. The U-shaped peritubular
capillary that runs parallel to the henle's loop is called vasa recta.
Q. 4. State the role of blood capillaries associated with the nephrons in kidney.
Ans. The role of blood capillaries associated with the nephrons are:
(i) To bring blood capillaries under pressure by afferent arteriole.
(ii) Formation of glomerulus in Bowman's capsule.
(iii) Formation of network of capillaries around the nephrons.
(iv) Selective reabsorption of water, glucose, salts, vitamins and other necessary things.
Q. 5. What is urine? Give the composition of urine.
Ans. Urine is a pale yellow coloured and transparent fluid.
(i) The pale yellow colour is due to pigment urochrome produced by the breakdown of
haemoglobin from worn out RBCs.
(ii) Normal urine contains about 95% water, 2% electrolytes (ions of salts, mainly chlorides,
sulphates, bicarbonates of sodium, potassium etc.), 2.6% urea, 0.3% uric acid and traces of
creatinine, ammonia, some pigments, hormones, allantoin and hippuric acid.
Q. 6. Explain the structure and the function of vasa rectae.
OR
What is vasa rectae? What is their role? [KVS-2012-13]
Ans. (i) The capillaries around the loop of Henle are called vasa rectae.
(ii) The vasa recta helps to retain reabsorbed ions and urea in the interstitial fluid of the
medulla. Thus, high osmotic pressure is maintained.

Q. 7. What is the role of collecting duct in selective reabsorption?
Ans. (i) The cuboidal epithelial cells of collecting tubule are permeable to water but not to salt.
This allows the reabsorption of large amounts of water which results in the formation of
concentrated urine.
(ii) It also plays a role in the maintenance of pH and ionic balance of blood by the selective
secretion of H + and K+ ions.
Q. 8. What is ADH? What are its functions?
Ans. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is one of the hormones that efficiently monitors and
regulates the functioning of the kidneys. Antidiuretic hormone released from the posterior
pituitary, prevents wide swings in water balance, helping to avoid dehydration or water
overload. ADH facilitates reabsorption of water by the distal parts of the kidney tubules and
thereby prevents diuresis.
Q. 9. How diabetes insipidus is different from diabetes mellitus?
Ans. Deficiency of ADH leads to diabetes insipidus, a condition marked by the output of huge
amounts of urine and intense thirst. The name itself (diabetes = overflow; insipidus tasteless)
distinguishes it from diabetes mellitus (mel = honey), in which insulin deficiency causes large
amounts of blood sugar to be lost in the urine.
Q. 10. What do you mean by artificial kidney?
Ans. Hemodialysis is an artificial process of removing toxic substances from the blood in
patients of kidney failure. The hemodialysis machine is therefore also known as the artificial
kidney.
Q. 11. Why is ADH so called?
Ans. ADH facilitates reabsorption of water by the distal parts of the kidney tubules and
thereby prevents diuresis. Also, it prevents wide swings in water balance, helping to avoid
dehydration or water overload. That is why it is called Antidiuretic hormone (ADH).

