Short Answer Type Question-I
Q.1. Why do plants need potassium and magnesium?
Ans. Plants need potassium because it helps in the maintenance of cell turgidity, opening and
closing of stomata, cation - anion balance, activation of enzymes, essential for
photosynthesis, respiration, protein synthesis and in membrane permeability. Magnesium is
required for chlorophyll formation, growth, metabolism and nodule formation in legumes.
Q. 2. In what form do plants absorb molybdenum from the soil ? List any two role of
molybdenum in plants.
Ans. Plants absorb it in the form of molybdate ions MoO4(2-) It is a component of several
enzymes, including nitrogenase and nitrate reductase involved in nitrogen metabolism.
Q. 3. Write the role of boron and copper for the normal activities of plants.
Ans. Role of Boron : It is required for uptake and utilization of Ca2+, membrane functioning,
pollen germination, cell elongation, cell differentiation and carbohydrate translocation.
Role of Copper : It is essential for overall metabolism of plants. It is associated with certain
enzymes involved in redox reactions.
Q. 4. How is it decided that the given element is a macronutrient or micronutrient ?
Ans. If an element found in plant is in larger amounts i.e., in excess of 10 mole kg -1 of dry
matter, it considered macronutrient.
If an element found in plant is in very Small amount i.e., less than 10 mole kg -1 of dry mater,
it is considered as micronutrient.
Q. 5. What role do calcium and sulphur play in plants?
Ans. Role of Calcium : It is required by meristematic and differentiating tissues. During cell
division, it is required in the synthesis of cell wall, for formation of spindle apparatus,
maintenance of normal functioning of cell membranes, and activation of certain enzymes.
Role of Sulphur : It is an important component of two amino acids : cysteine and methionine
and is also main constituent of several Coenzymes, vitamins like thiamine, biotin, CoA and
ferrodoxin.
Q. 6. What is meant by biological nitrogen fixation? Name two free living bacteria that
carry out biological nitrogen fixation.
[KVS 2015]
Ans. Reduction of nitrogen to ammonia and then into nitrites and nitrates by living organisms
is called biological nitrogen fixation e g. ğ´ğ‘§ğ‘œğ‘¡ğ‘œğ‘ğ‘ğ‘ğ‘¡ğ‘’ğ‘Ÿ, ğµğ‘’ğ‘–ğ‘—ğ‘’ğ‘Ÿğ‘›ğ‘–ğ‘ğ‘˜ğ‘–ğ‘, ğ‘ğ‘œğ‘ ğ‘¡ğ‘œğ‘, ğ´ğ‘›ğ‘ğ‘ğ‘ğ‘’ğ‘›ğ‘ etc.
Q. 7. Define deficiency symptoms. What are its importance ?
Ans. Deficiency symptoms are externally visible pathological conditions which are produced
due to absence or deficiency of some essential nutritive substances.
Importance : Deficiency symptoms in relation to particular elements helps the farmer and
the farm scientist to recognise the same when they are present in the field or area.

