Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. (i) What is G1 phase in cell cycle?
(ii) How does cytokinesis differ in plant and animal cells ?

[KVS 2015]

Ans. (i) G1 phase : (a) In this phase, the cell is metabolically active and continuously grows but
does not replicate its DNA.
(b) RNA and proteins are synthesized and the cell grow's in size.
S.NO. Cytokinesis in plant cells

Cytokinesis in animal
cells

(i)

In these, cell wall formation starts in the
centre of the cell and grows outward to
meet the existing lateral walls.

(ii)

Formation of new cell wall begins with the
formation of a precursor called cell plate.

In these cells, cytokinesis is achieved by the
appearance of a furrow
in the plasma
membrane.
The furrow gradually
deepens and ultimately
join in the cytoplasm
into two.

Q. 2. What are kinetochores? What is their function?
Ans. The kinetochore is a protein structure on chromatids where the spindle fibers attach during
ell division to pull sister chromatids apart. Their proteins help to hold the sister chromatids
together and also play a role in chromosome editing.
Q. 3. Differentiate G1 and G2 phase of cell cycle ?

[KVS Guwahati 2016]

Ans. Differences between G1 and G2 phase:
S. No.

G1

G2

(i)

This stage starts from the
birth of the daughter cell and
ends upto the time when the
cell begins synthesise DNA
RNA and proteins are
synthesized.

This stage starts from the end of S-phase
upto to the beginning of M-phase.

(ii)

In G2 phase, synthesis of DNA stops.
Formation of RNA and protein continues.

Q. 4. What does karyokinesis mean ? What are its phases?
Ans. Karyokinesis is a series of uninterrupted changes before forming two daughter nuclei.
Though karyokinesis is a continuous process, it has been divided into four phases. They are
prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase.

Q. 5. What do you understand by interphase?
Ans. (i) Interphase is a series of changes that occur in a newly formed cell and its nucleus
before it becomes capable of division again.
(ii) It is also called intermitosis. It is non-dividing state of the cell and its nucleus is called
interphase nucleus.
Q. 6. Why colchicine is called as the mitotic poison?
Ans. (i) Colchicine is an alkaloid obtained from the corms of Colchicune autumnate. The
alkaloid inhibits the formation of spindle by preventing assembly of microtubules.
(ii) The chromosomes duplicate but they remain within the same cell, increasing the number
of chromosomes. As a result, the colchicine treated meristematic cells show doubling of
chromosome.
Q. 7. (i) Which stage of cell division is most suitable for the study of chromosome
morphology.?
(ii) Which process changes the long, fine chromatin fibres into chromosomes ?
Ans. (i) Metaphase.
(ii) Condensation.
Q. 8. Distinguish between metaphase of mitosis and metaphase I of meiosis.
Ans.
S. No.

Metaphase of mitosis

Metaphase I of meiosis

(i)

Each chromosome consists of two chromatids
which are held together by centromere.

(ii)

The chromosomes line up in one plane to
make up the equatorial plate.

Homologous chromosomes
form bivalent. Each bivalent
consists of four chromatids and
two centromeres.
Bivalents become arranged in
the plane of the equator forming
equatorial plate.

