Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q.1. What is a vestibule?
Ans. The vestibule is slit like space bounded externally by lips and internally by the gums and
teeth.
Q.2. write dental formula for human milk teeth.
Ans. 𝑖

2
2

,𝑐

1
1

, 𝑝𝑚

0
0

,𝑚

2
2

× 2 = 20

Q.3. Name the bile pigments.
Ans. Bilirubin and biliverdin
Q.4. What is the function of secretin?
Ans. It is responsible for the secretion of water and bicarbonate as well as inhibition of gastric
mobility digestive enzymes as well as hormones secretes digestive enzymes as well as
hormones.
Q. 5. Name the gland in human body which secretes digestive enzymes as well as
hormones.
Ans. Pancreas is the gland in human body which secretes digestive enzymes as well
hormones.
Q.6. What are the main constituents of food?
Ans. The main constituents of food are carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids and fats.
Q.7. Name the liver cells which are phagocytic in nature.
Ans. Kupffer cells.
Q.8. What is the fate of haemoglobin of old worn out RBCs?
Ans. The old worn out red blood corpuscles are broken down in the liver cells. Their
haemoglobin is changed into bile pigments.
Q.9. What is the function of oesophageal sphincter?
Ans. Oesophageal sphincter is a muscular ring which regulates the opening of the oesophagus
into stomach.
Q.10. In how many parts is the pharynx divided?
Ans. The pharynx is divisible into three parts:
(i) Nasopharynx, (ii) oropharynx, (iii) Laryngo-pharynx.
Q.11. Name the vestigial organ in the alimentary canal of man.
Ans. Vermiform appendix.

Q.12. Name the three parts of small intestine of man.
Ans. The small intestine of man is distinguished into duodenum, jejunum and ileum.
Q.13. What does bile juice contain?
Ans. Bile juice contains bile pigments and bile salts but
Q.14. Name the largest gland of human body and where is it located.
Ans. Liver is the largest gland of human body located in the right upper part of the abdomen just
below the diaphragm.
Q.15. Define glycogenesis.
Ans. Synthesis of glycogen from glucose by liver is glycogenesis.
Q.16. What is peristalsis? What is its function?
Ans. It is a wave of contraction of the circular muscle fibers passing along the stomach and
oesophagus wall just behind a wave of relaxation. Due to this food is pushed into the relaxed
portion.
Q.17. How would non-secretion of saliva affect digestion of food in the mouth?
Ans. Saliva contain salivary amylase. Thus, in its absence salivary anylase would not be able to
digest starch or sugars.
Q.18. The wall of the alimentary canal has a thick layer of muscles. What is their
function?
Ans. The thick layers of muscles in the alimentary canal breaks the solid food into semi-liquid
food. It also facilitates the movement of food in the alimentary canal towars small intestine.
Q. 19. Name the enzyme which hydrolysis protein in acidic medium in adult human.
Ans. Pepsin.
Q.20. How digestion is carried out with the help of hydrolases?
Ans. Digestion is mostly carried out by the process of hydrolysis using water molecules for the
cleavage.
Q.21. Why there are villi in the intestine and not in stomach?
Ans. The villi of the small intestine are the absorbing units. They provide a large surface to
absorb end products of digestion in the blood or lymph.
Q.22. What is egestion?
Ans. Egestion is passing out of undigested food from the body.
Q.23. What is chyme?
Ans. The semi-digested food mixed thoroughly with the acidic gastric juice of the stomach is
called chyme.

Q. 24. Heart burn is a general complaint these days. How is it caused?
Ans. Sometimes chyme is squeezed into oesophagus. This causes burning of some cells and is
called heart burn.
Q.25. What is extracellular digestion?
Ans. When digestion takes place in a cavity of alimentary canal, lined by cells it is known as
extracellular digestion.
Q.26. Why is Castle's intrinsic factor essential?
Ans. Castle's intrinsic factor is essential for the absorption of Vitamin B12 (cobalamine) by the
villi of small intestine.
Q.27. Give one reason as to why many of the intestinal proteases are secreted in an
inactive form.
Ans. As their active form hydrolyse cellular and extracellular proteins of the organism itself,
inactive enzymes are converted to their active form only at the site of action.
Q.28. Name the chemical substance which changes pepsinogen into its active form.
Ans. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) is the substance which
Q.29. How would non-secretion of saliva affect digestion of food in the mouth?
Ans. Salivary amylase would not be able to digest starch or sugars.
Q.30. Name the source of trypsin and the food constituent which this enzyme hydrolyses.
Ans. Pancreatic juice is the source of trypsin. It hydrolyses proteins into peptides.
Q.31. What is intracellular digestion?
Ans. Digestion occuring within the cell is called intracellular digestion.
Q.32. What are Crypts of Lieberkuhn?
Ans. Crypts of Lieberkuhn are simple tubular intestinal glands which occur throughout small
intestine between villi and secrete enzyme and mucus.
Q.33. Name one function of saliva other than digestion.
Ans. The mucus in saliva helps to lubricate the food for swallowing
Q.34. Define glycogenesis.
Ans. Synthesis of glycogen from glucose by liver is glycogenesis.
Q.35. What is bolus?
Ans. Masticated food or food mixed with saliva is called as bolus.
Q.36. What is the meaning of absorption?

Ans. Absorption is the process by which nutrients pass from the alimentary canal into the blood
and lymph through its mucous membrane.
Q.37. Name the proenzymes which are found in pancreatic juice.
Ans. Pancreatic juice contains proenzymes trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen and procarboxypeptidase and enzyme elastase.
Q.38. What is the function of pancreatic 𝒂-amylase enzyme.
Ans. Pancreatic a-amylase enzyme converts starch into maltose, isomaltose and 𝑎-dextrins.
Q.39. What is regurgitation?
Ans. Backflow of food from oesophagus back into mouth is called regurgitation.
Q.40. What is deglutition?
Ans. Swallowing of food is called deglutition.
Q.41. Name an enzyme which after being present in digestive system, do not play any
role in digestion.
Ans. Enterokinase.
Q.42. Give one reason as to why many of the intestinal proteases are secreted in inactive
form?
Ans. To protect the intestinal mucosa from auto digestion, most of the proteases are activated
only after they are released.
Q.43. How does saliva act in self-defense?
Ans. Saliva has lysozyme which kills the bacteria by
Q.44. Mention any two functions of hydrochloric acid in gastric juice.
Ans. (i) HCI activates the pepsinogen and prorenin and (ii) provides acidic medium for the
action of pepsin.

