Short Answer Type Questions-II
Q. 1. What are the conditions required for growth?
Ans. Growth is influenced by a number of conditions which are as follows:
(i) Water is required for cell elongation, maintenance of turgidity of growing cells and providing
medium for enzyme action.
(ii) Oxygen is essential for aerobic respiration and hence availability of energy for biosynthetic
activity.
(iii) Nutrients are raw materials for synthesis of protoplasm, as well as the source of energy.
(iv) Light is required for tissue differentiation, synthesis of photosynthetic pigments and
photosynthesis.
(v) The optimum temperature for proper growth is 28-30°C
(vi) Environmental signals such as light &gravity also affect certain stages of growth.
Q. 2. Draw a diagram to show the sigmoid growth curve and write the names of the three
phases in it.
[Imp.]
OR
What does a sigmoid growth curve represent?
Ans. The three phases of growth are:
(i) Lag phase: Growth is slow in the initial stage
(ii) Exponential period of growth: It is second phase of maximum growth.
(iii) Stationary phase: When the nutrients become limiting growth slows down.

Q. 3. Discuss the statement: The growth is measurable.

[ V. imp ]

Ans. The growth is measurable: (i) The growth (at a cellular level) is basically a consequence
of increase in the amount of protoplasm.
(ii) We cannot measure growth directly, it is measured by some quantity that is more or less
proportional to it. So the growth is measured by a variety of parameters like increase in fresh
weight; dry weight; length; area; volume and cell number etc.
(iii) One single maize root apical meristem may give rise to more than 17,500 new cells per
hour.
(iv) The cell in a watermelon can increase in size by upto 3,50,000 times.
(v) Therefore, growth may be expressed as increase in cell number or as increase in size of
cell.
(vi) The growth of a pollen tube is measured in terms of length.
(vii) An increase in surface area denotes growth in a dorsiventral leaf or dicot leaf.
Q. 4. Distinguish between plant and animal growth.
Ans.
S. No.

Plant growth

Animal growth

(i)

Plant growth occurs in only
meristematic zones.
Plant growth is constructed in a
modular fashion. Development is
open-ended and their structure are
never complete.
Firstly growth is uniform but later it
becomes irregular.

In animal growth, almost all the cells
increase in size.
Embryonic growth is completed quite early,
but mature size may be reached at specific
periods.

The growth is unrestricted and
diffused.
The freshly formed seedling cannot
be called a miniature plant.

The growth is restricted and not diffused.

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)
(v)

Animals grow in a synchronous and well
defined way.

The young animal looks like a miniature
version of the adult.

Q. 5. What is differentiation? How can you distinguish between dedifferentiation and
redifferentiation ?
Ans. The cells which are derived from root apical meristem and shoot apical meristem
differentiate and mature to perform specific functions. This act leading to maturation is termed
as differentiation. During this, the cells undergo a few major structural changes both in their cell
walls and protoplasm.
(i) In plants, the living differentiated cells can regain the capacity to divide mitotically under
certain conditions. The sum of events are termed as dedifferentiation. A dedifferentiated tissue

can act as meristem. e.g., interfasicular vascular cambium, cork cambium and wound meristem.
(ii) The product of dedifferentiated cells or tissues which lose the ability to divide are called
redifferentiated cells and the term is known as redifferentiation. Secondary xylem and econdary
phloem that form interfasicular vascular cambium, secondary cortex and cork are the examples
of redifferentiated tissues.
Q. 6 Why is ABA known as 'stress hormone'?
Mention any two functions of this hormone. How are they antagonistic to gibberellins?
[KVS Silchar 2017]
Ans. Abscisic acid is also called as stress hormone because the synthesis of abscissic acid
is stimulated by drought, water logging and other adverse environmental conditions. It is
produced in many parts of the plants but more abundantly inside the chloroplast of green
cells. Abscisic acid owes its name to its role in the abscission of plant leaves. In preparation
for winter, ABA is produced in terminal buds. This slows plant growth and directs leaf
primordia to devlop scales to protect the dormant buds during the cold season.
They are antagonistic to gibberellins as gibberellins promotes stem elongation while
abscisics acid acts as growth inhibitor.
Q. 7. Define plant hormone. In how many groups does plant growth regulators are
classified?
Ans. A plant hormone is a chemical substance produced naturally in plants which is
translocated to another region for regulating one or more physiological reaction, when present in
low concentration. Based on functions, plant growth regulators are broadly divided into two
groups.
(i) Growth Promoters: Such plant growth regulators are involved in growth promoting activities
such as cell division, cell enlargement, pattern formation etc. These include auxins, gibberellins
and cytokinins.
(ii) Growth Inhibitors: Such PGRs are involved in various growth inhibiting activities such as
promotion of dormancy and abscission. These indude abscisic acid and ethylene.
Q. 8. Name the plant hormone which was discovered from fungus. Give its any functions.
OR
Give four major roles of Gibberellins as a plant growth regulator.
[KVS-2012-13]
Ans. Gibberellin plant hormone was discovered from the fungus Gibberella fujikuroi. Its four
functions are:
(i) Bolting and flowering.
(ii) Stem elongation and fruit elongation.
(iii) Parthenocarpy.
(iv) Early seed production.

Q. 9. What is abscissic acid and why it is called as stress hormone ?
Ans. Abscisic acid is a mildly acidic growth hormone, which functions as a general growth
inhibitor by counteracting other hormones or reactions mediated by them.
Abscisic acid is also called as stress hormone because the synthesis of abscisic acid is
stimulated by drought, water logging and other adverse environmental conditions. It is produced
in many parts of the plants but more abundantly inside the chloroplasts of green cells.
Q. 10. What is the effect of each of the following on germination of seeds:
(i) Abscisic acid,
(ii) Gibberellin
Ans. (i) Abscisic acid (ABA): It is known as growth inhibitor. It is synthesised in leaves and
transported to other parts of the plants by phloem. It promotes the dormancy of seeds. ABA
inhibits seed germination. The dormancy of seeds is due to abscissic acid. It usually interacts
with other plant growth regulators. Dormant seeds germinate when ABA is overcomed by
Gibberellins.
(ii) During seed germination, especially of cereals, gibberellins stimulates the production of
some mRNA and hydrolytic enzymes like amylases, lipases, ribonucleases and proteases. The
enzyme solubilises the reserve food of the seed which is then transferred to the embryo axis for
its growth.
Q. 11. What is the importance of photoperiodism ?
Ans. Importance of photoperiodism:
(i) Photoperiodism determines the season in which a particular plant shall come to flower.
(ii) Knowledge of photoperiodic effect is useful in keeping some plants in vegetative growth,
to obtain higher yield of tubers, rhizomes etc., or keep the plant in reproductive stage.
(iii) The phenomenon has helped the plant breeders in effecting cross-breeding in plants.
(iv) A plant can be made to flower throughout the year under greenhouse conditions if a
favourable photoperiod is provided to it.
Q. 12. What are the factors which govern the appearance of reproductive phase of
flowering in angiosperms?
Ans. The factors which govern the appearance of reproductive phase of flowering in
angiosperms are:
(i) Completion of juvenile phase and attainment of adult phase.
(ii) Exposure to suitable day length.
(iii) Proper temperature.

Q. 13. What are the requirements of vernalization ?
Ans. The requirements of vernalization are:
(i) Low temperature is required which is usually 0-5°C.
(ii) Period of low temperature treatment.
(iii) Actively dividing cells.
(iv) Water is required for perceiving the stimulus of
vernalization
(v) Aerobic respiration and proper nourishment.
Q. 14. Distinguish between auxins and gibberellins.
Ans.
S.NO

Auxins

Gibberellins

(i)

Induce rooting.

Do not induce rooting.

(ii)

Show apical dominance.

Do not show apical dominance.

(iii)

Are gibbane-ringed

(iv)

Have single/double unsaturated
ringed structure.
No bolting.

(v)

Transportation is only basipetal.

(vi)

Genetically dwarf shoots are unable to
undergo elongation by its application.

Transportation is acropetal and
basipetal both.
By its application, the genetically
dwarf shoots undergo elongation.

Bolting occurs.

Q. 15. What do you understand by abscission ? How does it occur in plants ?
Ans. (i) Abscission is a natural separation or shedding of leaves, foliage branches, fruits, floral
parts etc., from the plants.
(ii) A special narrow zone develops in the area of abscission. It is called abscission zone. This
zone is externally differentiated either by a shallow groove or by difference in colour of the
surface.
(iii) Tyloses develop in xylem vessels while callose plugs develop in the area of sieve plates.
(iv) Xylary tyloses reduce water supply to the organ causing water stress. As water stress
increases, the callose plugs dissolve.
(v) The various nutrients present in the abscissing organ pass back into the plant.
(vi) Two distinct layers develop in the abscission zone, separation layer and protective layer.

(vii) The protective layer is meant for dessication and checking entry of pathways. Abscission
occurs in the separation layer
Q.16. Give one antagonistic function of each of the following hormone pairs.
(i) Gibberellins-Abscissic acid
(ii) Cytokinin-Ethylene
(iii) Ethylene-Auxin.
Ans. (i) Gibberellins: Stem elongation.
Abscissic acid: Acts as a growth inhibitor.
(ii) Cytokinin: Counteract the dominance of apical buds.
Ethylene : Causes apical dominance and fruit ripening.
(iii) Auxin: It inhibits the above functions.
Ethylene: It breaks seed and bud dormancy and induces respiration rate during fruit
ripening.
Q. 17. What is the significance of vernalization?
Ans. The significance of vernalization are:
(i) It can help in shortening the juvenile or vegetative period of plant and bring about early
flowering. It is not only applicable to temperate plants but also to tropical plants. e.g, wheat, rice.
(ii) It increases yield, resistance to cold and diseases.
Q. 18. Differentiate between short day plants and long day plants.
Ans.
S.No
(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(vi)

Short day Plants
(SPD)
Plants flower under photoperiods of less than
critical day length.
Interruption during light period does not inhibit
flowering.
Flowering is inhibited if long dark period is
interrupted midway by a flash of light.
Long continuous and uninterrupted dark period
is critical for flowering.
Several plants flower under continuous dark if
light is supplemented with sucrose.

Long day plants
(LDP)
Plants flower under
photoperiods of
more than critical day length.
Interruption during light period
inhibits Flowering.
Flowering occurs if dark period
is interrupted by light.
Light period is critical for
flowering.
Several plants flower under
continuous light. The dark
period is not at all required.

