290

BIOLOGY

C HAPTER 19
E XCRETORY PRODUCTS AND
THEIR E LIMINATION
19.1 Human
Excretory
System
19.2 Urine Formation
19.3 Function of the
Tubules
19.4 Mechanism of
Concentration of
the Filtrate
19.5 Regulation of
Kidney Function
19.6 Micturition
19.7 Role of other
Organs in
Excretion
19.8 Disorders of the
Excretory
System

Animals accumulate ammonia, urea, uric acid, carbon dioxide, water
and ions like Na+, K+, Cl–, phosphate, sulphate, etc., either by metabolic
activities or by other means like excess ingestion. These substances have
to be removed totally or partially. In this chapter, you will learn the
mechanisms of elimination of these substances with special emphasis on
common nitrogenous wastes. Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major
forms of nitrogenous wastes excreted by the animals. Ammonia is the
most toxic form and requires large amount of water for its elimination,
whereas uric acid, being the least toxic, can be removed with a minimum
loss of water.
The process of excreting ammonia is Ammonotelism. Many bony fishes,
aquatic amphibians and aquatic insects are ammonotelic in nature.
Ammonia, as it is readily soluble, is generally excreted by diffusion across
body surfaces or through gill surfaces (in fish) as ammonium ions. Kidneys
do not play any significant role in its removal. Terrestrial adaptation
necessitated the production of lesser toxic nitrogenous wastes like urea
and uric acid for conservation of water. Mammals, many terrestrial
amphibians and marine fishes mainly excrete urea and are called ureotelic
animals. Ammonia produced by metabolism is converted into urea in the
liver of these animals and released into the blood which is filtered and
excreted out by the kidneys. Some amount of urea may be retained in the
kidney matrix of some of these animals to maintain a desired osmolarity.
Reptiles, birds, land snails and insects excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric
acid in the form of pellet or paste with a minimum loss of water and are
called uricotelic animals.

2021-22

EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

291

A survey of animal kingdom presents a variety of excretory structures.
In most of the invertebrates, these structures are simple tubular forms
whereas vertebrates have complex tubular organs called kidneys. Some
of these structures are mentioned here. Protonephridia or flame cells are
the excretory structures in Platyhelminthes (Flatworms, e.g., Planaria),
rotifers, some annelids and the cephalochordate – Amphioxus.
Protonephridia are primarily concerned with ionic and fluid volume
regulation, i.e., osmoregulation. Nephridia are the tubular excretory
structures of earthworms and other annelids. Nephridia help to remove
nitrogenous wastes and maintain a fluid and ionic balance. Malpighian
tubules are the excretory structures of most of the insects including
cockroaches. Malpighian tubules help in the removal of nitrogenous
wastes and osmoregulation. Antennal glands or green glands perform
the excretory function in crustaceans like prawns.

19.1 HUMAN EXCRETORY SYSTEM
In humans, the excretory system consists
of a pair of kidneys, one pair of ureters, a
urinary bladder and a urethra (Figure
19.1). Kidneys are reddish brown, bean
shaped structures situated between the
levels of last thoracic and third lumbar
vertebra close to the dorsal inner wall of
the abdominal cavity. Each kidney of an
adult human measures 10-12 cm in
length, 5-7 cm in width, 2-3 cm in
thickness with an average weight of 120170 g. Towards the centre of the inner
concave surface of the kidney is a notch
called hilum through which ureter, blood
vessels and nerves enter. Inner to the hilum
is a broad funnel shaped space called the
renal pelvis with projections called calyces.
The outer layer of kidney is a tough
capsule. Inside the kidney, there are two
zones, an outer cortex and an inner
medulla. The medulla is divided into a few
conical masses (medullary pyramids)
projecting into the calyces (sing.: calyx).
The cortex extends in between the

Figure 19.1 Human Urinary system

2021-22

292

BIOLOGY

Figure 19.2 Longitudinal section (Diagrammatic)
of Kidney

Figure 19.3

medullary pyramids as renal columns called
Columns of Bertini (Figure 19.2).
Each kidney has nearly one million
complex tubular structures called nephrons
(Figure 19.3), which are the functional units.
Each nephron has two parts – the
glomerulus and the renal tubule.
Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed by
the afferent arteriole – a fine branch of renal
artery. Blood from the glomerulus is carried
away by an efferent arteriole.
The renal tubule begins with a double
walled cup-like structure called Bowman’s
capsule, which encloses the glomerulus.
Glomerulus alongwith Bowman’s capsule, is
called the malpighian body or renal
corpuscle (Figure 19.4). The tubule
continues further to form a highly coiled
network – proximal convoluted tubule

A diagrammatic representation of a nephron showing blood vessels,
duct and tubule

2021-22

EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

293

(PCT). A hairpin shaped Henle’s loop is the
Afferent arteriole
next part of the tubule which has a
descending and an ascending limb. The
Efferent
ascending limb continues as another highly
arteriole
coiled tubular region called distal
convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of many
Bowman’s
capsule
nephrons open into a straight tube called
collecting duct, many of which converge and
open into the renal pelvis through medullary
pyramids in the calyces.
The Malpighian corpuscle, PCT and DCT
of the nephron are situated in the cortical
region of the kidney whereas the loop of Henle
dips into the medulla. In majority of
nephrons, the loop of Henle is too short and
Proximal
extends only very little into the medulla. Such
convoluted tubule
nephrons are called cortical nephrons. In
some of the nephrons, the loop of Henle is Figure 19.4 Malpighian body (renal corpuscle)
very long and runs deep into the medulla.
These nephrons are called juxta medullary
nephrons.
The efferent arteriole emerging from the glomerulus forms a fine
capillary network around the renal tubule called the peritubular
capillaries. A minute vessel of this network runs parallel to the Henle’s
loop forming a ‘U’ shaped vasa recta. Vasa recta is absent or highly
reduced in cortical nephrons.

19.2 URINE FORMATION
Urine formation involves three main processes namely, glomerular
filtration, reabsorption and secretion, that takes place in different parts of
the nephron.
The first step in urine formation is the filtration of blood, which is carried
out by the glomerulus and is called glomerular filtration. On an average,
1100-1200 ml of blood is filtered by the kidneys per minute which constitute
roughly 1/5th of the blood pumped out by each ventricle of the heart in a
minute. The glomerular capillary blood pressure causes filtration of blood
through 3 layers, i.e., the endothelium of glomerular blood vessels, the
epithelium of Bowman’s capsule and a basement membrane between these
two layers. The epithelial cells of Bowman’s capsule called podocytes are
arranged in an intricate manner so as to leave some minute spaces called
filtration slits or slit pores. Blood is filtered so finely through these
membranes, that almost all the constituents of the plasma except the
proteins pass onto the lumen of the Bowman’s capsule. Therefore, it is
considered as a process of ultra filtration.

2021-22

294

BIOLOGY

The amount of the filtrate formed by the kidneys per minute is called
glomerular filtration rate (GFR). GFR in a healthy individual is
approximately 125 ml/minute, i.e., 180 litres per day !
The kidneys have built-in mechanisms for the regulation of glomerular
filtration rate. One such efficient mechanism is carried out by juxta
glomerular apparatus (JGA). JGA is a special sensitive region formed by
cellular modifications in the distal convoluted tubule and the afferent
arteriole at the location of their contact. A fall in GFR can activate the JG
cells to release renin which can stimulate the glomerular blood flow and
thereby the GFR back to normal.
A comparison of the volume of the filtrate formed per day (180 litres
per day) with that of the urine released (1.5 litres), suggest that nearly 99
per cent of the filtrate has to be reabsorbed by the renal tubules. This
process is called reabsorption. The tubular epithelial cells in different
segments of nephron perform this either by active or passive mechanisms.
For example, substances like glucose, amino acids, Na+, etc., in the filtrate
are reabsorbed actively whereas the nitrogenous wastes are absorbed by
passive transport. Reabsorption of water also occurs passively in the initial
segments of the nephron (Figure 19.5).
During urine formation, the tubular cells secrete substances like H+,
+
K and ammonia into the filtrate. Tubular secretion is also an important
step in urine formation as it helps in the maintenance of ionic and acid
base balance of body fluids.

19.3 FUNCTION

OF THE

TUBULES

Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT): PCT is lined by simple cuboidal
brush border epithelium which increases the surface area for reabsorption.
Nearly all of the essential nutrients, and 70-80 per cent of electrolytes
and water are reabsorbed by this segment. PCT also helps to maintain
the pH and ionic balance of the body fluids by selective secretion of
hydrogen ions, ammonia and potassium ions into the filtrate and by
absorption of HCO3– from it.
Henle’s Loop: Reabsorption is minimum in its ascending limb.
However, this region plays a significant role in the maintenance of high
osmolarity of medullary interstitial fluid. The descending limb of loop of
Henle is permeable to water but almost impermeable to electrolytes. This
concentrates the filtrate as it moves down. The ascending limb is
impermeable to water but allows transport of electrolytes actively or
passively. Therefore, as the concentrated filtrate pass upward, it gets
diluted due to the passage of electrolytes to the medullary fluid.
Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT): Conditional reabsorption of Na+
and water takes place in this segment. DCT is also capable of reabsorption
of HCO3– and selective secretion of hydrogen and potassium ions and
NH3 to maintain the pH and sodium-potassium balance in blood.

2021-22

EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

295

Figure 19.5 Reabsorption and secretion of major substances at different parts of
the nephron (Arrows indicate direction of movement of materials.)

Collecting Duct: This long duct extends from the cortex of the kidney
to the inner parts of the medulla. Large amounts of water could be
reabsorbed from this region to produce a concentrated urine. This segment
allows passage of small amounts of urea into the medullary interstitium
to keep up the osmolarity. It also plays a role in the maintenance of pH
and ionic balance of blood by the selective secretion of H+ and K+ ions
(Figure 19.5).

19.4 MECHANISM

OF

CONCENTRATION

OF THE

FILTRATE

Mammals have the ability to produce a concentrated urine. The Henle’s
loop and vasa recta play a significant role in this. The flow of filtrate in
the two limbs of Henle’s loop is in opposite directions and thus forms a
counter current. The flow of blood through the two limbs of vasa recta is

2021-22

296

BIOLOGY

also in a counter current pattern. The proximity between the Henle’s loop
and vasa recta, as well as the counter current in them help in maintaining
an increasing osmolarity towards the inner medullary interstitium, i.e.,
from 300 mOsmolL–1 in the cortex to about 1200 mOsmolL–1 in the inner
medulla. This gradient is mainly caused by NaCl and urea. NaCl is
transported by the ascending limb of Henle’s loop which is exchanged
with the descending limb of vasa recta. NaCl is returned to the interstitium
by the ascending portion of vasa recta. Similarly, small amounts of urea
enter the thin segment of the ascending limb of Henle’s loop which is
transported back to the interstitium by the collecting tubule. The above
described transport of substances facilitated by the special arrangement
of Henle’s loop and vasa recta is called the counter current mechanism
(Figure. 19.6). This mechanism helps to maintain a concentration gradient

Figure 19.6 Diagrammatic representation of a nephron and vasa recta showing
counter current mechanisms

2021-22

EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

297

in the medullary interstitium. Presence of such interstitial gradient helps
in an easy passage of water from the collecting tubule thereby
concentrating the filtrate (urine). Human kidneys can produce urine nearly
four times concentrated than the initial filtrate formed.

19.5 REGULATION

OF

KIDNEY FUNCTION

The functioning of the kidneys is efficiently monitored and regulated by
hormonal feedback mechanisms involving the hypothalamus, JGA and
to a certain extent, the heart.
Osmoreceptors in the body are activated by changes in blood volume,
body fluid volume and ionic concentration. An excessive loss of fluid from
the body can activate these receptors which stimulate the hypothalamus
to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin from the
neurohypophysis. ADH facilitates water reabsorption from latter parts of
the tubule, thereby preventing diuresis. An increase in body fluid volume
can switch off the osmoreceptors and suppress the ADH release to complete
the feedback. ADH can also affect the kidney function by its constrictory
effects on blood vessels. This causes an increase in blood pressure. An
increase in blood pressure can increase the glomerular blood flow and
thereby the GFR.
The JGA plays a complex regulatory role. A fall in glomerular blood
flow/glomerular blood pressure/GFR can activate the JG cells to release
renin which converts angiotensinogen in blood to angiotensin I and
further to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II, being a powerful
vasoconstrictor, increases the glomerular blood pressure and thereby
GFR. Angiotensin II also activates the adrenal cortex to release
Aldosterone. Aldosterone causes reabsorption of Na+ and water from
the distal parts of the tubule. This also leads to an increase in blood
pressure and GFR. This complex mechanism is generally known as
the Renin-Angiotensin mechanism.
An increase in blood flow to the atria of the heart can cause the release
of Atrial Natriuretic Factor (ANF). ANF can cause vasodilation (dilation of
blood vessels) and thereby decrease the blood pressure. ANF mechanism,
therefore, acts as a check on the renin-angiotensin mechanism.

19.6 MICTURITION
Urine formed by the nephrons is ultimately carried to the urinary bladder
where it is stored till a voluntary signal is given by the central nervous
system (CNS). This signal is initiated by the stretching of the urinary bladder
as it gets filled with urine. In response, the stretch receptors on the walls
of the bladder send signals to the CNS. The CNS passes on motor messages

2021-22

298

BIOLOGY

to initiate the contraction of smooth muscles of the bladder and
simultaneous relaxation of the urethral sphincter causing the release of
urine. The process of release of urine is called micturition and the neural
mechanisms causing it is called the micturition reflex. An adult human
excretes, on an average, 1 to 1.5 litres of urine per day. The urine formed
is a light yellow coloured watery fluid which is slightly acidic (pH-6.0)
and has a characterestic odour. On an average, 25-30 gm of urea is
excreted out per day. Various conditions can affect the characteristics of
urine. Analysis of urine helps in clinical diagnosis of many metabolic
discorders as well as malfunctioning of the kidney. For example, presence
of glucose (Glycosuria) and ketone bodies (Ketonuria) in urine are
indicative of diabetes mellitus.

19.7 ROLE

OF OTHER

ORGANS

IN

EXCRETION

Other than the kidneys, lungs, liver and skin also help in the elimination
of excretory wastes.
Our lungs remove large amounts of CO2 (approximately 200mL/
minute) and also significant quantities of water every day. Liver, the largest
gland in our body, secretes bile-containing substances like bilirubin,
biliverdin, cholesterol, degraded steroid hormones, vitamins and drugs.
Most of these substances ultimately pass out alongwith digestive wastes.
The sweat and sebaceous glands in the skin can eliminate certain
substances through their secretions. Sweat produced by the sweat
glands is a watery fluid containing NaCl, small amounts of urea, lactic
acid, etc. Though the primary function of sweat is to facilitate a cooling
effect on the body surface, it also helps in the removal of some of the
wastes mentioned above. Sebaceous glands eliminate certain
substances like sterols, hydrocarbons and waxes through sebum. This
secretion provides a protective oily covering for the skin. Do you know
that small amounts of nitrogenous wastes could be eliminated through
saliva too?

19.8 DISORDERS OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM
Malfunctioning of kidneys can lead to accumulation of urea in blood, a
condition called uremia, which is highly harmful and may lead to kidney
failure. In such patients, urea can be removed by a process called
hemodialysis. During the process of haemodialysis, the blood drained
from a convenient artery is pumped into a dialysing unit called artificial
kidney. Blood drained from a convenient artery is pumped into a dialysing
unit after adding an anticoagulant like heparin. The unit contains a coiled
cellophane tube surrounded by a fluid (dialysing fluid) having the same

2021-22

EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

299

composition as that of plasma except the nitrogenous wastes. The porous
cellophane membrance of the tube allows the passage of molecules based
on concentration gradient. As nitrogenous wastes are absent in the
dialysing fluid, these substances freely move out, thereby clearing the
blood. The cleared blood is pumped back to the body through a vein
after adding anti-heparin to it. This method is a boon for thousands of
uremic patients all over the world.
Kidney transplantation is the ultimate method in the correction of
acute renal failures (kidney failure). A functioning kidney is used in
transplantation from a donor, preferably a close relative, to minimise its
chances of rejection by the immune system of the host. Modern clinical
procedures have increased the success rate of such a complicated
technique.
Renal calculi: Stone or insoluble mass of crystallised salts (oxalates,
etc.) formed within the kidney.
Glomerulonephritis: Inflammation of glomeruli of kidney.

SUMMARY
Many nitrogen containing substances, ions, CO2, water, etc., that accumulate in
the body have to be eliminated. Nature of nitrogenous wastes formed and their
excretion vary among animals, mainly depending on the habitat (availability of
water). Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major nitrogenous wastes excreted.
Protonephridia, nephridia, malpighian tubules, green glands and the kidneys are
the common excretory organs in animals. They not only eliminate nitrogenous wastes
but also help in the maintenance of ionic and acid-base balance of body fluids.
In humans, the excretory system consists of one pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters,
a urinary bladder and a urethra. Each kidney has over a million tubular structures
called nephrons. Nephron is the functional unit of kidney and has two portions –
glomerulus and renal tubule. Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed from afferent
arterioles, fine branches of renal artery. The renal tubule starts with a double walled
Bowman’s capsule and is further differentiated into a proximal convoluted tubule
(PCT), Henle’s loop (HL) and distal convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of many
nephrons join to a common collecting duct many of which ultimately open into the
renal pelvis through the medullary pyramids. The Bowman’s capsule encloses the
glomerulus to form Malpighian or renal corpuscle.
Urine formation involves three main processes, i.e., filtration, reabsorption and
secretion. Filtration is a non-selective process performed by the glomerulus using
the glomerular capillary blood pressure. About 1200 ml of blood is filtered by the
glomerulus per minute to form 125 ml of filtrate in the Bowman’s capsule per

2021-22

300

BIOLOGY

minute (GFR). JGA, a specialised portion of the nephrons, plays a significant role
in the regulation of GFR. Nearly 99 per cent reabsorption of the filtrate takes place
through different parts of the nephrons. PCT is the major site of reabsorption and
selective secretion. HL primarily helps to maintain osmolar gradient
(300 mOsmolL–1 -1200 mOsmolL–1) within the kidney interstitium. DCT and
collecting duct allow extensive reabsorption of water and certain electrolytes, which
help in osmoregulation: H+, K+ and NH3 could be secreted into the filtrate by the
tubules to maintain the ionic balance and pH of body fluids.
A counter current mechanism operates between the two limbs of the loop of
Henle and those of vasa recta (capillary parallel to Henle’s loop). The filtrate gets
concentrated as it moves down the descending limb but is diluted by the ascending
limb. Electrolytes and urea are retained in the interstitium by this arrangement.
DCT and collecting duct concentrate the filtrate about four times, i.e., from 300
mOsmolL–1 to 1200 mOsmolL–1, an excellent mechanism of conservation of water.
Urine is stored in the urinary bladder till a voluntary signal from CNS carries out
its release through urethra, i.e., micturition. Skin, lungs and liver also assist in
excretion.

EXERCISES
1. Define Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
2. Explain the autoregulatory mechanism of GFR.
3. Indicate whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) Micturition is carried out by a reflex.
(b) ADH helps in water elimination, making the urine hypotonic.
(c) Protein-free fluid is filtered from blood plasma into the Bowman’s capsule.
(d) Henle’s loop plays an important role in concentrating the urine.
(e) Glucose is actively reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule.
4. Give a brief account of the counter current mechanism.
5. Describe the role of liver, lungs and skin in excretion.
6. Explain micturition.
7. Match the items of column I with those of column II :
Column I

Column II

(a) Ammonotelism

(i) Birds

(b) Bowman’s capsule

(ii) Water reabsorption

(c) Micturition

(iii) Bony fish

(d) Uricotelism

(iv) Urinary bladder

(d) ADH

(v) Renal tubule

2021-22

EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION

301

8. What is meant by the term osmoregulation?
9. Terrestrial animals are generally either ureotelic or uricotelic, not ammonotelic,
why ?
10. What is the significance of juxta glomerular apparatus (JGA) in kidney function?
11. Name the following:
(a) A chordate animal having flame cells as excretory structures
(b) Cortical portions projecting between the medullary pyramids in the human
kidney
(c) A loop of capillary running parallel to the Henle’s loop.
12. Fill in the gaps :
(a) Ascending limb of Henle’s loop is _______ to water whereas the descending
limb is _______ to it.
(b) Reabsorption of water from distal parts of the tubules is facilitated by hormone
_______.
(c) Dialysis fluid contain all the constituents as in plasma except _______.
(d) A healthy adult human excretes (on an average) _______ gm of urea/day.

2021-22

