302

BIOLOGY

C HAPTER 20
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
20.1 Types of
Movement
20.2 Muscle
20.3 Skeletal System
20.4 Joints
20.5 Disorders of
Muscular and
Skeletal System

Movement is one of the significant features of living beings. Animals and
plants exhibit a wide range of movements. Streaming of protoplasm in
the unicellular organisms like Amoeba is a simple form of movement.
Movement of cilia, flagella and tentacles are shown by many organisms.
Human beings can move limbs, jaws, eyelids, tongue, etc. Some of the
movements result in a change of place or location. Such voluntary
movements are called locomotion. Walking, running, climbing, flying,
swimming are all some forms of locomotory movements. Locomotory
structures need not be different from those affecting other types of
movements. For example, in Paramoecium, cilia helps in the movement of
food through cytopharynx and in locomotion as well. Hydra can use its
tentacles for capturing its prey and also use them for locomotion. We use
limbs for changes in body postures and locomotion as well. The above
observations suggest that movements and locomotion cannot be studied
separately. The two may be linked by stating that all locomotions are
movements but all movements are not locomotions.
Methods of locomotion performed by animals vary with their habitats
and the demand of the situation. However, locomotion is generally for
search of food, shelter, mate, suitable breeding grounds, favourable
climatic conditions or to escape from enemies/predators.

20.1 TYPES OF MOVEMENT
Cells of the human body exhibit three main types of movements, namely,
amoeboid, ciliary and muscular.

2021-22

LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT

303

Some specialised cells in our body like macrophages and leucocytes
in blood exhibit amoeboid movement. It is effected by pseudopodia formed
by the streaming of protoplasm (as in Amoeba). Cytoskeletal elements
like microfilaments are also involved in amoeboid movement.
Ciliary movement occurs in most of our internal tubular organs which
are lined by ciliated epithelium. The coordinated movements of cilia in
the trachea help us in removing dust particles and some of the foreign
substances inhaled alongwith the atmospheric air. Passage of ova through
the female reproductive tract is also facilitated by the ciliary movement.
Movement of our limbs, jaws, tongue, etc, require muscular movement.
The contractile property of muscles are effectively used for locomotion
and other movements by human beings and majority of multicellular
organisms. Locomotion requires a perfect coordinated activity of muscular,
skeletal and neural systems. In this chapter, you will learn about the
types of muscles, their structure, mechanism of their contraction and
important aspects of the skeletal system.

20.2 MUSCLE
You have studied in Chapter 8 that the cilia and flagella are the outgrowths
of the cell membrane. Flagellar movement helps in the swimming of
spermatozoa, maintenance of water current in the canal system of sponges
and in locomotion of Protozoans like Euglena. Muscle is a specialised
tissue of mesodermal origin. About 40-50 per cent of the body
weight of a human adult is contributed by muscles. They have
special properties like excitability, contractility, extensibility and
elasticity. Muscles have been classified using different criteria,
namely location, appearance and nature of regulation of their
activities. Based on their location, three types of muscles are
identified : (i) Skeletal (ii) Visceral and (iii) Cardiac.
Skeletal muscles are closely associated with the skeletal components
of the body. They have a striped appearance under the microscope and
hence are called striated muscles. As their activities are under the
voluntary control of the nervous system, they are known as voluntary
muscles too. They are primarily involved in locomotory actions and
changes of body postures.
Visceral muscles are located in the inner walls of hollow visceral organs
of the body like the alimentary canal, reproductive tract, etc. They do not
exhibit any striation and are smooth in appearance. Hence, they are called
smooth muscles (nonstriated muscle). Their activities are not under the
voluntary control of the nervous system and are therefore known as
involuntary muscles. They assist, for example, in the transportation of food
through the digestive tract and gametes through the genital tract.

2021-22

304

BIOLOGY
As the name suggests, Cardiac muscles are the muscles of heart.
Many cardiac muscle cells assemble in a branching pattern to form a
cardiac muscle. Based on appearance, cardiac muscles are striated. They
are involuntary in nature as the nervous system does not control their
activities directly.
Let us examine a skeletal muscle in detail to understand the structure
and mechanism of contraction. Each organised skeletal muscle in our
body is made of a number of muscle bundles or fascicles held together
by a common collagenous connective tissue layer called fascia. Each
muscle bundle contains a number of muscle fibres (Figure 20.1). Each

Fascicle
(muscle bundle)

Muscle fibre
(muscle cell)
Sarcolemma
Blood capillary

Figure 20.1 Diagrammatic cross sectional view of a muscle showing muscle bundles
and muscle fibres

muscle fibre is lined by the plasma membrane called sarcolemma
enclosing the sarcoplasm. Muscle fibre is a syncitium as the sarcoplasm
contains many nuclei. The endoplasmic reticulum, i.e., sarcoplasmic
reticulum of the muscle fibres is the store house of calcium ions. A
characteristic feature of the muscle fibre is the presence of a large number
of parallelly arranged filaments in the sarcoplasm called myofilaments or
myofibrils. Each myofibril has alternate dark and light bands on it. A
detailed study of the myofibril has established that the striated appearance
is due to the distribution pattern of two important proteins – Actin and
Myosin. The light bands contain actin and is called I-band or Isotropic
band, whereas the dark band called ‘A’ or Anisotropic band contains

2021-22

LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT

305

myosin. Both the proteins are arranged as rod-like structures, parallel to
each other and also to the longitudinal axis of the myofibrils. Actin
filaments are thinner as compared to the myosin filaments, hence are
commonly called thin and thick filaments respectively. In the centre of
each ‘I’ band is an elastic fibre called ‘Z’ line which bisects it. The thin
filaments are firmly attached to the ‘Z’ line. The thick filaments in the
‘A’ band are also held together in the middle of this band by a thin fibrous
membrane called ‘M’ line. The ‘A’ and ‘I’ bands are arranged alternately
throughout the length of the myofibrils. The portion of the myofibril
between two successive ‘Z’ lines is considered as the functional unit of
contraction and is called a sarcomere (Figure 20.2). In a resting state, the
edges of thin filaments on either side of the thick filaments partially overlap
the free ends of the thick filaments leaving the central part of the thick
filaments. This central part of thick filament, not overlapped by thin
filaments is called the ‘H’ zone.

(a)

(b)
Figure 20.2 Diagrammatic representation of (a) anatomy of a muscle fibre showing
a sarcomere (b) a sarcomere

2021-22

306

BIOLOGY

20.2.1 Structure of Contractile Proteins
Each actin (thin) filament is made of two ‘F’ (filamentous) actins
helically wound to each other. Each ‘F’ actin is a polymer of monomeric
‘G’ (Globular) actins. Two filaments of another protein, tropomyosin
also run close to the ‘F’ actins throughout its length. A complex protein
Troponin is distributed at regular intervals on the tropomyosin. In the
resting state a subunit of troponin masks the active binding sites for
myosin on the actin filaments (Figure 20.3a).
Each myosin (thick) filament is also a polymerised protein. Many
monomeric proteins called Meromyosins (Figure 20.3b) constitute one
thick filament. Each meromyosin has two important parts, a globular
head with a short arm and a tail, the former being called the heavy
meromyosin (HMM) and the latter, the light meromyosin (LMM). The HMM
component, i.e.; the head and short arm projects outwards at regular
distance and angle from each other from the surface of a polymerised myosin
filament and is known as cross arm. The globular head is an active ATPase
enzyme and has binding sites for ATP and active sites for actin.

(a)

Actin binding sites

Head

ATP binding sites
Cross arm

(b)
Figure 20.3 (a) An actin (thin) filament (b) Myosin monomer (Meromyosin)

20.2.2 Mechanism of Muscle Contraction
Mechanism of muscle contraction is best explained by the sliding filament
theory which states that contraction of a muscle fibre takes place by the
sliding of the thin filaments over the thick filaments.

2021-22

LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT

307

Muscle contraction is initiated by a signal sent by the central nervous
system (CNS) via a motor neuron. A motor neuron alongwith the muscle
fibres connected to it constitute a motor unit. The junction between a
motor neuron and the sarcolemma of the muscle fibre is called the
neuromuscular junction or motor-end plate. A neural signal reaching
this junction releases a neurotransmitter (Acetyl choline) which generates
an action potential in the sarcolemma. This spreads through the muscle
fibre and causes the release of calcium ions into the sarcoplasm. Increase
in Ca++ level leads to the binding of calcium with a subunit of troponin on
actin filaments and thereby remove the masking of active sites for myosin.
Utilising the energy from ATP hydrolysis, the myosin head now binds to
the exposed active sites on actin to form a cross bridge (Figure 20.4). This

Figure 20.4 Stages in cross bridge formation, rotation of head and breaking of
cross bridge

pulls the attached actin filaments towards the centre of ‘A’ band. The
‘Z’ line attached to these actins are also pulled inwards thereby causing a
shortening of the sarcomere, i.e., contraction. It is clear from the above
steps, that during shortening of the muscle, i.e., contraction, the ‘I’ bands
get reduced, whereas the ‘A’ bands retain the length (Figure 20.5). The
myosin, releasing the ADP and P1 goes back to its relaxed state. A new
ATP binds and the cross-bridge is broken (Figure 20.4). The ATP is again
hydrolysed by the myosin head and the cycle of cross bridge formation

2021-22

308

BIOLOGY

Figure 20.5 Sliding-filament theory of muscle contraction (movement of the thin
filaments and the relative size of the I band and H zones)

and breakage is repeated causing further sliding. The process continues
till the Ca++ ions are pumped back to the sarcoplasmic cisternae resulting
in the masking of actin filaments. This causes the return of ‘Z’ lines back
to their original position, i.e., relaxation. The reaction time of the fibres
can vary in different muscles. Repeated activation of the muscles can lead
to the accumulation of lactic acid due to anaerobic breakdown of glycogen
in them, causing fatigue. Muscle contains a red coloured oxygen storing
pigment called myoglobin. Myoglobin content is high in some of the
muscles which gives a reddish appearance. Such muscles are called the
Red fibres. These muscles also contain plenty of mitochondria which can
utilise the large amount of oxygen stored in them for ATP production.
These muscles, therefore, can also be called aerobic muscles. On the
other hand, some of the muscles possess very less quantity of myoglobin
and therefore, appear pale or whitish. These are the White fibres. Number
of mitochondria are also few in them, but the amount of sarcoplasmic
reticulum is high. They depend on anaerobic process for energy.

2021-22

LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT

309

20.3 SKELETAL SYSTEM
Skeletal system consists of a framework of bones and a few cartilages.
This system has a significant role in movement shown by the body.
Imagine chewing food without jaw bones and walking around without
the limb bones. Bone and cartilage are specialised connective tissues.
The former has a very hard matrix due to calcium salts in it and the latter
has slightly pliable matrix due to chondroitin salts. In human beings,
this system is made up of 206 bones and a few cartilages. It is grouped
into two principal divisions – the axial and the appendicular skeleton.
Axial skeleton comprises 80 bones distributed along the main axis
of the body. The skull, vertebral column, sternum and ribs constitute
axial skeleton. The skull (Figure 20.6) is composed of two sets of bones –
Frontal bone

Parietal
bone

Sphenoid bone
Ethmoid bone
Lacrimal bone
Nasal bone

Temporal
bone

Zygomatic bone
Occipital
bone

Maxilla

Occipital
condyle

Mandible
Hyoid bone
Figure 20.6 Diagrammatic view of human skull

cranial and facial, that totals to 22 bones. Cranial bones are 8 in number.
They form the hard protective outer covering, cranium for the brain. The
facial region is made up of 14 skeletal elements which form the front part
of the skull. A single U-shaped bone called hyoid is present at the base of
the buccal cavity and it is also included in the skull. Each middle ear
contains three tiny bones – Malleus, Incus and Stapes, collectively called
Ear Ossicles. The skull region articulates with the superior region of the

2021-22

310

BIOLOGY

Cervical vertebra

Thoracic
vertebra

Intervertebral
disc

Lumbar
vertebra

Sacrum
Coccyx

Figure 20.7 Vertebral column (right lateral view)

Figure 20.8 Ribs and rib cage

2021-22

vertebral column with the help of two occipital
condyles (dicondylic skull).
Our vertebral column (Figure 20.7) is
formed by 26 serially arranged units called
vertebrae and is dorsally placed. It extends from
the base of the skull and constitutes the main
framework of the trunk. Each vertebra has a
central hollow portion (neural canal) through
which the spinal cord passes. First vertebra is
the atlas and it articulates with the occipital
condyles. The vertebral column is differentiated
into cervical (7), thoracic (12), lumbar (5), sacral
(1-fused) and coccygeal (1-fused) regions
starting from the skull. The number of cervical
vertebrae are seven in almost all mammals
including human beings. The vertebral column
protects the spinal cord, supports the head and
serves as the point of attachment for the ribs
and musculature of the back. Sternum is a
flat bone on the ventral midline of thorax.
There are 12 pairs of ribs. Each rib is a
thin flat bone connected dorsally to the
vertebral column and ventrally to the sternum.
It has two articulation surfaces on its dorsal
end and is hence called bicephalic. First seven
pairs of ribs are called true ribs. Dorsally, they
are attached to the thoracic vertebrae and
ventrally connected to the sternum with the
help of hyaline cartilage. The 8th, 9th and 10th
pairs of ribs do not articulate directly with the
sternum but join the seventh rib with the help
of hyaline cartilage. These are called
vertebrochondral (false) ribs. Last 2 pairs (11th
and 12th) of ribs are not connected ventrally
and are therefore, called floating ribs. Thoracic
vertebrae, ribs and sternum together form the
rib cage (Figure 20.8).
The bones of the limbs alongwith their
girdles constitute the appendicular skeleton.
Each limb is made of 30 bones. The bones of
the hand (fore limb) are humerus, radius and

LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT

ulna, carpals (wrist bones – 8 in number),
metacarpals (palm bones – 5 in number) and
phalanges (digits – 14 in number) (Figure
20.9). Femur (thigh bone – the longest bone),
tibia and fibula, tarsals (ankle bones – 7 in
number), metatarsals (5 in number) and
phalanges (digits – 14 in number) are the
bones of the legs (hind limb) (Figure 20.10). A
cup shaped bone called patella cover the knee
ventrally (knee cap).
Pectoral and Pelvic girdle bones help in
the articulation of the upper and the lower limbs
respectively with the axial skeleton. Each
girdle is formed of two halves. Each half of
pectoral girdle consists of a clavicle and a
scapula (Figure 20.9). Scapula is a large
triangular flat bone situated in the dorsal part
of the thorax between the second and the
seventh ribs. The dorsal, flat, triangular body
of scapula has a slightly elevated ridge called
the spine which projects as a flat, expanded
process called the acromion. The clavicle
articulates with this. Below the acromion is a
depression called the glenoid cavity which
articulates with the head of the humerus to
form the shoulder joint. Each clavicle is a long
slender bone with two curvatures. This bone
is commonly called the collar bone.
Pelvic girdle consists of two coxal bones
(Figure 20.10). Each coxal bone is formed by
the fusion of three bones – ilium, ischium and
pubis. At the point of fusion of the above bones
is a cavity called acetabulum to which the thigh
bone articulates. The two halves of the pelvic
girdle meet ventrally to form the pubic
symphysis containing fibrous cartilage.

311

Figure 20.9 Right pectoral girdle and upper
arm. (frontal view)

20.4 JOINTS
Joints are essential for all types of movements
involving the bony parts of the body.
Locomotory movements are no exception to

Figure 20.10 Right pelvic girdle and lower limb
bones (frontal view)

2021-22

312

BIOLOGY

this. Joints are points of contact between bones, or between bones and
cartilages. Force generated by the muscles is used to carry out movement
through joints, where the joint acts as a fulcrum. The movability at these
joints vary depending on different factors. Joints have been classified into
three major structural forms, namely, fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial.
Fibrous joints do not allow any movement. This type of joint is shown
by the flat skull bones which fuse end-to-end with the help of dense fibrous
connective tissues in the form of sutures, to form the cranium.
In cartilaginous joints, the bones involved are joined together with
the help of cartilages. The joint between the adjacent vertebrae in the
vertebral column is of this pattern and it permits limited movements.
Synovial joints are characterised by the presence of a fluid filled synovial
cavity between the articulating surfaces of the two bones. Such an arragement
allows considerable movement. These joints help in locomotion and many
other movements. Ball and socket joint (between humerus and pectoral
girdle), hinge joint (knee joint), pivot joint (between atlas and axis), gliding
joint (between the carpals) and saddle joint (between carpal and metacarpal
of thumb) are some examples.

20.5 DISORDERS

OF

MUSCULAR

AND

SKELETAL SYSTEM

Myasthenia gravis: Auto immune disorder affecting neuromuscular
junction leading to fatigue, weakening and paralysis of skeletal muscle.
Muscular dystrophy: Progressive degeneration of skeletal muscle mostly
due to genetic disorder.
Tetany: Rapid spasms (wild contractions) in muscle due to low Ca++ in
body fluid.
Arthritis: Inflammation of joints.
Osteoporosis: Age-related disorder characterised by decreased bone mass
and increased chances of fractures. Decreased levels of estrogen is a
common cause.
Gout: Inflammation of joints due to accumulation of uric acid crystals.

SUMMARY
Movement is an essential feature of all living beings. Protoplasmic streaming, ciliary
movements, movements of fins, limbs, wings, etc., are some forms exhibited by
animals. A voluntary movement which causes the animal to change its place, is

2021-22

LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT

313

called locomotion. Animals move generally in search of food, shelter, mate, breeding
ground, better climate or to protect themselves.
The cells of the human body exhibit amoeboid, ciliary and muscular
movements. Locomotion and many other movements require coordinated muscular
activities. Three types of muscles are present in our body. Skeletal muscles are
attached to skeletal elements. They appear striated and are voluntary in nature.
Visceral muscles, present in the inner walls of visceral organs are nonstriated and
involuntary. Cardiac muscles are the muscles of the heart. They are striated,
branched and involuntary. Muscles possess excitability, contractility, extensibility
and elasticity.
Muscle fibre is the anatomical unit of muscle. Each muscle fibre has many
parallelly arranged myofibrils. Each myofibril contains many serially arranged
units called sarcomere which are the functional units. Each sarcomere has a central
‘A’ band made of thick myosin filaments, and two half ‘I’ bands made of thin actin
filaments on either side of it marked by ‘Z’ lines. Actin and myosin are polymerised
proteins with contractility. The active sites for myosin on resting actin filament are
masked by a protein-troponin. Myosin head contains ATPase and has ATP binding
sites and active sites for actin. A motor neuron carries signal to the muscle fibre
which generates an action potential in it. This causes the release of Ca++ from
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca++ activates actin which binds to the myosin head to
form a cross bridge. These cross bridges pull the actin filaments causing them to
slide over the myosin filaments and thereby causing contraction. Ca++ are then
returned to sarcoplasmic reticulum which inactivate the actin. Cross bridges are
broken and the muscles relax.
Repeated stimulation of muscles leads to fatigue. Muscles are classified as
Red and White fibres based primarily on the amount of red coloured myoglobin
pigment in them.
Bones and cartilages constitute our skeletal system. The skeletal system is
divisible into axial and appendicular. Skull, vertebral column, ribs and sternum
constitute the axial skeleton. Limb bones and girdles form the appendicular
skeleton. Three types of joints are formed between bones or between bone and
cartilage – fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial. Synovial joints allow considerable
movements and therefore, play a significant role in locomotion.

EXERCISES
1. Draw the diagram of a sarcomere of skeletal muscle showing different regions.
2. Define sliding filament theory of muscle contraction.
3. Describe the important steps in muscle contraction.

2021-22

314

BIOLOGY

4. Write true or false. If false change the statement so that it is true.
(a) Actin is present in thin filament
(b) H-zone of striated muscle fibre represents both thick and thin filaments.
(c) Human skeleton has 206 bones.
(d) There are 11 pairs of ribs in man.
(e) Sternum is present on the ventral side of the body.
5. Write the difference between :
(a) Actin and Myosin
(b) Red and White muscles
(c) Pectoral and Pelvic girdle
6. Match Column I with Column II :
Column I
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Smooth muscle
Tropomyosin
Red muscle
Skull

Column II
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Myoglobin
Thin filament
Sutures
Involuntary

7. What are the different types of movements exhibited by the cells of human
body?
8. How do you distinguish between a skeletal muscle and a cardiac muscle?
9. Name the type of joint between the following:(a) atlas/axis
(b) carpal/metacarpal of thumb
(c) between phalanges
(d) femur/acetabulum
(e) between cranial bones
(f) between pubic bones in the pelvic girdle
10. Fill in the blank spaces:
(a) All mammals (except a few) have __________ cervical vertebra.
(b) The number of phalanges in each limb of human is __________
(c) Thin filament of myofibril contains 2 ‘F’ actins and two other proteins namely
__________ and __________.
(d) In a muscle fibre Ca++ is stored in __________
(e) __________ and __________ pairs of ribs are called floating ribs.
(f) The human cranium is made of __________ bones.

2021-22

