46

BIOLOGY

C HAPTER 4
ANIMAL KINGDOM
4.1 Basis of
Classification
4.2 Classification of
Animals

When you look around, you will observe different animals with different
structures and forms. As over a million species of animals have been
described till now, the need for classification becomes all the more
important. The classification also helps in assigning a systematic position
to newly described species.

4.1 B ASIS OF CLASSIFICATION
Inspite of differences in structure and form of different animals, there are
fundamental features common to various individuals in relation to the
arrangement of cells, body symmetry, nature of coelom, patterns of
digestive, circulatory or reproductive systems. These features are used
as the basis of animal classification and some of them are discussed here.

4.1.1

Levels of Organisation

Though all members of Animalia are multicellular, all of them do not
exhibit the same pattern of organisation of cells. For example, in sponges,
the cells are arranged as loose cell aggregates, i.e., they exhibit cellular
level of organisation. Some division of labour (activities) occur among
the cells. In coelenterates, the arrangement of cells is more complex. Here
the cells performing the same function are arranged into tissues, hence is
called tissue level of organisation. A still higher level of organisation, i.e.,
organ level is exhibited by members of Platyhelminthes and other higher
phyla where tissues are grouped together to form organs, each specialised
for a particular function. In animals like Annelids, Arthropods, Molluscs,

2021-22

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

74
47

Echinoderms and Chordates, organs have
associated to form functional systems, each
system concerned with a specific physiological
function. This pattern is called organ system
level of organisation. Organ systems in different
groups of animals exhibit various patterns of
complexities. For example, the digestive system
in Platyhelminthes has only a single opening
to the outside of the body that serves as both
mouth and anus, and is hence called
incomplete. A complete digestive system has
two openings, mouth and anus. Similarly, the
circulatory system may be of two types:

Figure 4.1 (a) Radial symmetry

(i) open type in which the blood is pumped
out of the heart and the cells and tissues are
directly bathed in it and
(ii) closed type in which the blood is circulated
through a series of vessels of varying diameters
(arteries, veins and capillaries).

4.1.2

Symmetry

Animals can be categorised on the basis of their
symmetry. Sponges are mostly asymmetrical,
i.e., any plane that passes through the centre
does not divide them into equal halves. When
any plane passing through the central axis of
the body divides the organism into two identical
halves, it is called radial symmetry.
Coelenterates, ctenophores and echinoderms
have this kind of body plan (Figure 4.1a).
Animals like annelids, arthropods, etc., where
the body can be divided into identical left and
right halves in only one plane, exhibit bilateral
symmetry (Figure 4.1b).

Figure 4.1 (b) Bilateral symmetry

Ectoderm

Mesoglea

Endoderm

4.1.3 Diploblastic and Triploblastic
Organisation
Animals in which the cells are arranged in two
embryonic layers, an external ectoderm and
an internal endoderm, are called diploblastic
animals, e.g., coelenterates. An undifferentiated
layer, mesoglea, is present in between the
ectoderm and the endoderm (Figure 4.2a).

(a)
Figure 4.2

2021-22

Mesoderm

(b)

Showing germinal layers :
(a) Diploblastic (b) Triploblastic

48

BIOLOGY

Those animals in which the developing embryo has a third germinal layer,
mesoderm, in between the ectoderm and endoderm, are called
triploblastic animals (platyhelminthes to chordates, Figure 4.2b).

4.1.4

Figure 4.3 Diagrammatic sectional view of :
(a) Coelomate (b) Pseudocoelomate
(c) Acoelomate

4.1.5

Coelom

Presence or absence of a cavity between the body
wall and the gut wall is very important in
classification. The body cavity, which is lined
by mesoderm is called coelom. Animals
possessing coelom are called coelomates, e.g.,
annelids, molluscs, arthropods, echinoderms,
hemichordates and chordates (Figure 4.3a). In
some animals, the body cavity is not lined by
mesoderm, instead, the mesoderm is present as
scattered pouches in between the ectoderm and
endoderm. Such a body cavity is called
pseudocoelom and the animals possessing them
are called pseudocoelomates, e.g.,
aschelminthes (Figure 4.3b). The animals in
which the body cavity is absent are called
acoelomates, e.g., platyhelminthes (Figure 4.3c).

Segmentation

In some animals, the body is externally and internally divided into
segments with a serial repetition of at least some organs. For example, in
earthworm, the body shows this pattern called metameric segmentation
and the phenomenon is known as metamerism.

4.1.6

Notochord

Notochord is a mesodermally derived rod-like structure formed on the
dorsal side during embryonic development in some animals. Animals with
notochord are called chordates and those animals which do not form this
structure are called non-chordates, e.g., porifera to echinoderms.

4.2 CLASSIFICATION

OF

ANIMALS

The broad classification of Animalia based on common fundamental
features as mentioned in the preceding sections is given in Figure 4.4.

2021-22

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

94
49

*Echinodermata exhibits radial or bilateral symmetry depending on the stage.

Figure 4.4

Broad classification of Kingdom Animalia based on common fundamental features

The important characteristic features of the
different phyla are described.

4.2.1 Phylum – Porifera
Members of this phylum are commonly known
as sponges. They are generally marine and mostly
asymmetrical animals (Figure 4.5). These are
primitive multicellular animals and have cellular
level of organisation. Sponges have a water
transport or canal system. Water enters through
minute pores (ostia) in the body wall into a central
cavity, spongocoel, from where it goes out
through the osculum. This pathway of water
transport is helpful in food gathering, respiratory
exchange and removal of waste. Choanocytes
(a)
or collar cells line the spongocoel and the canals.
Digestion is intracellular. The body is supported
by a skeleton made up of spicules or spongin
fibres. Sexes are not separate (hermaphrodite),
i.e., eggs and sperms are produced by the same
individual. Sponges reproduce asexually by
fragmentation and sexually by formation of
gametes. Fertilisation is internal and development
is indirect having a larval stage which is Figure 4.5
morphologically distinct from the adult.

2021-22

(b)

(c)
Examples of Porifera : (a) Sycon
(b) Euspongia (c) Spongilla

50

BIOLOGY

Examples: Sycon (Scypha), Spongilla (Fresh water sponge) and Euspongia
(Bath sponge).

4.2.2 Phylum – Coelenterata (Cnidaria)
They are aquatic, mostly marine, sessile or free-swimming, radially
symmetrical animals (Figure 4.6). The name cnidaria is derived from the

(a)
Figure 4.6

Figure 4.7
Diagrammatic view of
Cnidoblast

(b)

Examples of Coelenterata indicating outline of their body form :
(a) Aurelia (Medusa) (b) Adamsia (Polyp)

cnidoblasts or cnidocytes (which contain the stinging capsules or
nematocysts) present on the tentacles and the body. Cnidoblasts are used
for anchorage, defense and for the capture of prey (Figure 4.7). Cnidarians
exhibit tissue level of organisation and are diploblastic. They have a central
gastro-vascular cavity with a single opening, mouth on hypostome.
Digestion is extracellular and intracellular. Some of the cnidarians, e.g.,
corals have a skeleton composed of calcium carbonate. Cnidarians exhibit
two basic body forms called polyp and medusa (Figure 4.6). The former
is a sessile and cylindrical form like Hydra, Adamsia, etc. whereas, the
latter is umbrella-shaped and free-swimming like Aurelia or jelly fish.
Those cnidarians which exist in both forms exhibit alternation of
generation (Metagenesis), i.e., polyps produce medusae asexually and
medusae form the polyps sexually (e.g., Obelia).
Examples: Physalia (Portuguese man-of-war), Adamsia (Sea anemone),
Pennatula (Sea-pen), Gorgonia (Sea-fan) and Meandrina (Brain coral).

2021-22

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

4.2.3

15
51

Phylum – Ctenophora

Ctenophores, commonly known as sea walnuts or comb jellies
are exclusively marine, radially symmetrical, diploblastic
organisms with tissue level of organisation. The body bears
eight external rows of ciliated comb plates, which help in
locomotion (Figure 4.8). Digestion is both extracellular and
intracellular. Bioluminescence (the property of a living
organism to emit light) is well-marked in ctenophores. Sexes
are not separate. Reproduction takes place only by sexual
means. Fertilisation is external with indirect development.
Examples: Pleurobrachia and Ctenoplana.

4.2.4

Phylum – Platyhelminthes

They have dorso-ventrally flattened body, hence are called
flatworms (Figure 4.9). These are mostly endoparasites found
in animals including human beings. Flatworms are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic and acoelomate animals with organ
level of organisation. Hooks and suckers are present in the
parasitic forms. Some of them absorb nutrients from the host
directly through their body surface. Specialised cells called
flame cells help in osmoregulation and excretion. Sexes are not
separate. Fertilisation is internal and development is through
many larval stages. Some members like Planaria possess high
regeneration capacity.

Figure 4.8 Example of
Ctenophora
(Pleurobrachia)

Examples: Taenia (Tapeworm), Fasciola (Liver fluke).

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.9 Examples of Platyhelminthes : (a) Tape worm (b) Liver fluke

2021-22

52

BIOLOGY

4.2.5 Phylum – Aschelminthes

Male

The body of the aschelminthes is circular in
cross-section, hence, the name roundworms
(Figure 4.10). They may be freeliving, aquatic
and terrestrial or parasitic in plants and animals.
Roundworms have organ-system level of body
organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical,
triploblastic and pseudocoelomate animals.
Alimentary canal is complete with a welldeveloped muscular pharynx. An excretory
tube removes body wastes from the body cavity
through the excretory pore. Sexes are separate
(dioecious), i.e., males and females are distinct.
Often females are longer than males. Fertilisation
is internal and development may be direct (the
young ones resemble the adult) or indirect.

Female

Figure 4.10 Example of
Aschelminthes:
Roundworm

Examples : Ascaris (Roundworm), Wuchereria
(Filaria worm), Ancylostoma (Hookworm).

4.2.6 Phylum – Annelida
They may be aquatic (marine and fresh water) or
terrestrial; free-living, and sometimes parasitic.
They exhibit organ-system level of body
organisation and bilateral symmetry. They are
triploblastic, metamerically segmented and
coelomate animals. Their body surface is
distinctly marked out into segments or
metameres and, hence, the phylum name
Annelida (Latin, annulus : little ring) (Figure 4.11).
They possess longitudinal and circular muscles
which help in locomotion. Aquatic annelids like
Nereis possess lateral appendages, parapodia,
which help in swimming. A closed circulatory
system is present. Nephridia (sing. nephridium)
help in osmoregulation and excretion. Neural
system consists of paired ganglia (sing. ganglion)
connected by lateral nerves to a double ventral
nerve cord. Nereis, an aquatic form, is dioecious,
but earthworms and leeches are monoecious.
Reproduction is sexual.
Figure 4.11 Examples of Annelida : (a) Nereis
(b) Hirudinaria

Examples : Nereis, Pheretima (Earthworm) and
Hirudinaria (Blood sucking leech).

2021-22

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

4.2.7

35
53

Phylum – Arthropoda

This is the largest phylum of Animalia which
includes insects. Over two-thirds of all named
species on earth are arthropods (Figure 4.12).
They have organ-system level of organisation.
They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic,
segmented and coelomate animals. The body
of arthropods is covered by chitinous
exoskeleton. The body consists of head, thorax
and abdomen. They have jointed appendages
(arthros-joint, poda-appendages). Respiratory
organs are gills, book gills, book lungs or
tracheal system. Circulatory system is of open
type. Sensory organs like antennae, eyes
(compound and simple), statocysts or
balancing organs are present. Excretion takes
place through malpighian tubules. They are
mostly dioecious. Fertilisation is usually
internal. They are mostly oviparous.
Development may be direct or indirect.
Examples: Economically important insects –
Apis (Honey bee), Bombyx (Silkworm), Laccifer
(Lac insect)
Vectors – Anopheles, Culex and Aedes
(Mosquitoes)
Gregarious pest – Locusta (Locust)
Living fossil – Limulus (King crab).

4.2.8

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4.12 Examples of Arthropoda :
(a) Locust (b) Butterfly
(c) Scorpion (d) Prawn

Phylum – Mollusca

This is the second largest animal phylum
(Figure 4.13). Molluscs are terrestrial or aquatic
(marine or fresh water) having an organ-system
level of organisation. They are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
animals. Body is covered by a calcareous shell
and is unsegmented with a distinct head,
muscular foot and visceral hump. A soft and
spongy layer of skin forms a mantle over the
visceral hump. The space between the hump
and the mantle is called the mantle cavity in
which feather like gills are present. They have
respiratory and excretory functions. The
anterior head region has sensory tentacles. The
mouth contains a file-like rasping organ for
feeding, called radula.

(a)

(b)
Figure 4.13 Examples of Mollusca :
(a) Pila (b) Octopus

2021-22

54

BIOLOGY

They are usually dioecious and oviparous with indirect
development.
Examples: Pila (Apple snail), Pinctada (Pearl oyster), Sepia
(Cuttlefish), Loligo (Squid), Octopus (Devil fish), Aplysia (Seahare), Dentalium (Tusk shell) and Chaetopleura (Chiton).

4.2.9 Phylum – Echinodermata
(a)

(b)

Figure 4.14 Examples of
Echinodermata :
(a) Asterias
(b) Ophiura

These animals have an endoskeleton of calcareous ossicles
and, hence, the name Echinodermata (Spiny bodied, Figure
4.14). All are marine with organ-system level of organisation.
The adult echinoderms are radially symmetrical but larvae
are bilaterally symmetrical. They are triploblastic and
coelomate animals. Digestive system is complete with mouth
on the lower (ventral) side and anus on the upper (dorsal)
side. The most distinctive feature of echinoderms is the
presence of water vascular system which helps in
locomotion, capture and transport of food and respiration.
An excretory system is absent. Sexes are separate.
Reproduction is sexual. Fertilisation is usually external.
Development is indirect with free-swimming larva.
Examples: Asterias (Star fish), Echinus (Sea urchin), Antedon
(Sea lily), Cucumaria (Sea cucumber) and Ophiura (Brittle star).

4.2.10 Phylum – Hemichordata
Proboscis

Collar

Trunk

Hemichordata was earlier considered as a sub-phylum under
phylum Chordata. But now it is placed as a separate phylum
under non-chordata. Hemichordates have a rudimentary
structure in the collar region called stomochord, a structure
similar to notochord.
This phylum consists of a small group of worm-like
marine animals with organ-system level of organisation. They
are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
animals. The body is cylindrical and is composed of an
anterior proboscis, a collar and a long trunk (Figure 4.15).
Circulatory system is of open type. Respiration takes place
through gills. Excretory organ is proboscis gland. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is external. Development is indirect.
Examples: Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus.

4.2.11 Phylum – Chordata
Figure 4.15 Balanoglossus

Animals belonging to phylum Chordata are fundamentally
characterised by the presence of a notochord, a dorsal

2021-22

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

55
55

hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal
gill slits (Figure 4.16). These are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic, coelomate with
organ-system level of organisation. They
possess a post anal tail and a closed circulatory
system.
Table 4.1 presents a comparison of salient
features of chordates and non-chordates.

Nerve cord

Notochord

Post-anal part
Gill slits
Figure 4.16

Chordata characteristics

TABLE 4.1 Comparison of Chordates and Non-chordates
S.No. Chordates

Non-chordates

1.

Notochord present.

Notochord absent.

2.

Central nervous system is dorsal,
hollow and single.

Central nervous system is ventral, solid
and double.

3.

Pharynx perforated by gill slits.

Gill slits are absent.

4.

Heart is ventral.

Heart is dorsal (if present).

5.

A post-anal part (tail) is present.

Post-anal tail is absent.

Phylum Chordata is divided into three
subphyla: Urochordata or Tunicata,
Cephalochordata and Vertebrata.
Subphyla
Urochordata
and
Cephalochordata are often referred to as
protochordates (Figure 4.17) and are
exclusively marine. In Urochordata, notochord
is present only in larval tail, while in
Cephalochordata, it extends from head to tail
region and is persistent throughout their life.
Examples: Urochordata – Ascidia, Salpa,
Doliolum; Cephalochordata – Branchiostoma
(Amphioxus or Lancelet).
The members of subphylum Vertebrata
possess notochord during the embryonic
period. The notochord is replaced by a
cartilaginous or bony vertebral column in the
adult. Thus all vertebrates are chordates but
all chordates are not vertebrates. Besides the
basic chordate characters, vertebrates have a
ventral muscular heart with two, three or four
chambers, kidneys for excretion and
osmoregulation and paired appendages which
may be fins or limbs.

Figure 4.17 Ascidia

2021-22

56

BIOLOGY

The subphylum Vertebrata is further divided as follows:
Vertebrata
Division
Gnathostomata
(bears jaw)

Agnatha
(lacks jaw)

Super Class
Pisces
(bear fins)
Class
1. Cyclostomata

Class
1. Chondrichthyes
2. Osteichthyes

4.2.11.1

Figure 4.18 A jawless vertebrate - Petromyzon

Tetrapoda
(bear limbs)
1.
2.
3.
4.

Class
Amphibia
Reptilia
Aves
Mammals

Class – Cyclostomata

All living members of the class Cyclostomata are
ectoparasites on some fishes. They have an
elongated body bearing 6-15 pairs of gill slits
for respiration. Cyclostomes have a sucking and
circular mouth without jaws (Fig. 4.18). Their
body is devoid of scales and paired fins.
Cranium and vertebral column are
cartilaginous. Circulation is of closed type.
Cyclostomes are marine but migrate for
spawning to fresh water. After spawning, within
a few days, they die. Their larvae, after
metamorphosis, return to the ocean.
Examples: Petromyzon (Lamprey) and Myxine
(Hagfish).
4.2.11.2

(a)

(b)
Figure 4.19 Example of Cartilaginous fishes :
(a) Scoliodon (b) Pristis

Class – Chondrichthyes

They are marine animals with streamlined body
and have cartilaginous endoskeleton
(Figure 4.19). Mouth is located ventrally.
Notochord is persistent throughout life. Gill
slits are separate and without operculum (gill
cover). The skin is tough, containing minute
placoid scales. Teeth are modified placoid
scales which are backwardly directed. Their
jaws are very powerful. These animals are
predaceous. Due to the absence of air bladder,
they have to swim constantly to avoid sinking.

2021-22

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

75
57

Heart is two-chambered (one auricle and one ventricle).
Some of them have electric organs (e.g., Torpedo) and
some possess poison sting (e.g., Trygon). They are
cold-blooded (poikilothermous) animals, i.e., they lack
the capacity to regulate their body temperature. Sexes
are separate. In males pelvic fins bear claspers. They
have internal fertilisation and many of them are
viviparous.
Examples: Scoliodon (Dog fish), Pristis (Saw fish),
Carcharodon (Great white shark), Trygon (Sting ray).
4.2.11.3

Class – Osteichthyes

It includes both marine and fresh water fishes with bony
endoskeleton. Their body is streamlined. Mouth is
mostly terminal (Figure 4.20). They have four pairs of
gills which are covered by an operculum on each side.
Skin is covered with cycloid/ctenoid scales. Air bladder
is present which regulates buoyancy. Heart is twochambered (one auricle and one ventricle). They are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is usually external. They are mostly oviparous and
development is direct.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.20 Examples of Bony fishes :
(a) Hippocampus (b) Catla

Examples: Marine – Exocoetus (Flying fish),
Hippocampus (Sea horse); Freshwater – Labeo (Rohu),
Catla (Katla), Clarias (Magur); Aquarium – Betta
(Fighting fish), Pterophyllum (Angel fish).
4.2.11.4

Class – Amphibia

As the name indicates (Gr., Amphi : dual, bios, life),
amphibians can live in aquatic as well as terrestrial
habitats (Figure 4.21). Most of them have two pairs of
limbs. Body is divisible into head and trunk. Tail may
be present in some. The amphibian skin is moist
(without scales). The eyes have eyelids. A tympanum
represents the ear. Alimentary canal, urinary and
reproductive tracts open into a common chamber called
cloaca which opens to the exterior. Respiration is by
gills, lungs and through skin. The heart is threechambered (two auricles and one ventricle). These are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is external. They are oviparous and development
is indirect.
Examples: Bufo (Toad), Rana (Frog), Hyla (Tree frog),
Salamandra (Salamander), Ichthyophis (Limbless
amphibia).

2021-22

(a)

(b)
Figure 4.21 Examples of Amphibia :
(a) Salamandra
(b) Rana

58

BIOLOGY

(b)

(a)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4.22 Reptiles: (a) Chameleon (b) Crocodilus (c) Chelone (d) Naja

4.2.11.5

Class – Reptilia

The class name refers to their creeping or crawling mode of locomotion
(Latin, repere or reptum, to creep or crawl). They are mostly terrestrial
animals and their body is covered by dry and cornified skin, epidermal
scales or scutes (Fig. 4.22). They do not have external ear openings.
Tympanum represents ear. Limbs, when present, are two pairs. Heart is
usually three-chambered, but four-chambered in crocodiles. Reptiles are
poikilotherms. Snakes and lizards shed their scales as skin cast. Sexes
are separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development
is direct.
Examples: Chelone (Turtle), Testudo (Tortoise), Chameleon (Tree lizard),
Calotes (Garden lizard), Crocodilus (Crocodile), Alligator (Alligator).
Hemidactylus (Wall lizard), Poisonous snakes – Naja (Cobra), Bangarus
(Krait), Vipera (Viper).
4.2.11.6

Class – Aves

The characteristic features of Aves (birds) are the presence of feathers
and most of them can fly except flightless birds (e.g., Ostrich). They possess
beak (Figure 4.23). The forelimbs are modified into wings. The hind limbs
generally have scales and are modified for walking, swimming or clasping
the tree branches. Skin is dry without glands except the oil gland at the
base of the tail. Endoskeleton is fully ossified (bony) and the long bones
are hollow with air cavities (pneumatic). The digestive tract of birds has
additional chambers, the crop and gizzard. Heart is completely fourchambered. They are warm-blooded (homoiothermous) animals, i.e.,
they are able to maintain a constant body temperature. Respiration is by

2021-22

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

(a)

95
59

(d)

(c)

(b)

Figure 4.23 Some birds : (a) Neophron (b) Struthio (c) Psittacula (d) Pavo

lungs. Air sacs connected to lungs supplement respiration. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development is
direct.
Examples : Corvus (Crow), Columba (Pigeon), Psittacula (Parrot), Struthio
(Ostrich), Pavo (Peacock), Aptenodytes (Penguin), Neophron (Vulture).
4.2.11.7

Class – Mammalia

They are found in a variety of habitats – polar ice caps, deserts, mountains,
forests, grasslands and dark caves. Some of them have adapted to fly or
live in water. The most unique mammalian characteristic is the presence
of milk producing glands (mammary glands) by which the young ones
are nourished. They have two pairs of limbs, adapted for walking, running,
climbing, burrowing, swimming or flying (Figure 4.24). The skin of

(c)
(a)

(d)
(b)
Figure 4.24 Some mammals : (a) Ornithorhynchus (b) Macropus (c) Pteropus (d) Balaenoptera

2021-22

60

BIOLOGY

mammals is unique in possessing hair. External ears or pinnae are
present. Different types of teeth are present in the jaw. Heart is fourchambered. They are homoiothermous. Respiration is by lungs. Sexes
are separate and fertilisation is internal. They are viviparous with few
exceptions and development is direct.
Examples: Oviparous-Ornithorhynchus (Platypus); Viviparous Macropus (Kangaroo), Pteropus (Flying fox), Camelus (Camel), Macaca
(Monkey), Rattus (Rat), Canis (Dog), Felis (Cat), Elephas (Elephant),
Equus (Horse), Delphinus (Common dolphin), Balaenoptera (Blue whale),
Panthera tigris (Tiger), Panthera leo (Lion).
The salient distinguishing features of all phyla under animal kingdom
is comprehensively given in the Table 4.2.

TABLE 4.2 Salient Features of Different Phyla in the Animal Kingdom
Circulatory
System

Respiratory
System

Distinctive
Features

Absent

Absent

Absent

Body with pores
and canals in walls.

Absent

Incomplete

Absent

Absent

Cnidoblasts
present.

Absent

Absent

Incomplete

Absent

Absent

Comb plates for
locomotion.

Bilateral Absent

Absent

Incomplete

Absent

Absent

Flat body, suckers.

OrganAschelminsystem
thes

Pseudo
Bilateral coelomate

Absent

Complete

Absent

Absent

Organsystem

CoeloBilateral mate

Present

Complete

Present

Absent

OrganArthropoda system

Bilateral Coelomate

Present

Complete

Present

Present

Organsystem

Bilateral Coelomate

Absent

Complete

Present

Present

Mollusca

Echinodermata

Organsystem

Radial

Coelomate

Absent

Complete

Present

Present

Organsystem

Bilateral Coelomate

Absent

Complete

Present

Present

Organsystem

Bilateral Coelomate

Present

Complete

Present

Present

Phylum

Level of
Organisation

Symmetry

Coelom

Segmen- Digestive
System
tation

Porifera

Cellular

Various

Absent

Absent

Coelenterata
(Cnidaria) Tissue

Radial

Absent

Tissue

Radial

Organ &
Organsystem

Ctenophora
Platyhelminthes

Annelida

Hemichordata

Chordata

2021-22

Often wormshaped,
elongated.
Body segmentation like rings.
Exoskeleton of cuticle, jointed appendages.
External skeleton
of shell usually
present.
Water vascular
system, radial
symmetry.
Wor m-like with
proboscis, collar
and trunk.
Notochord, dorsal
hollow nerve cord,
gill slits with
limbs or fins.

ANIMAL
KINGDOM
ANIMAL
KINGDOM

16
61

SUMMARY
The basic fundamental features such as level of organisation, symmetry, cell
organisation, coelom, segmentation, notochord, etc., have enabled us to broadly
classify the animal kingdom. Besides the fundamental features, there are many
other distinctive characters which are specific for each phyla or class.
Porifera includes multicellular animals which exhibit cellular level of
organisation and have characteristic flagellated choanocytes. The coelenterates
have tentacles and bear cnidoblasts. They are mostly aquatic, sessile or free-floating.
The ctenophores are marine animals with comb plates. The platyhelminths have
flat body and exhibit bilateral symmetry. The parasitic forms show distinct suckers
and hooks. Aschelminthes are pseudocoelomates and include parasitic as well as
non-parasitic roundworms.
Annelids are metamerically segmented animals with a true coelom. The
arthropods are the most abundant group of animals characterised by the presence
of jointed appendages. The molluscs have a soft body surrounded by an external
calcareous shell. The body is covered with external skeleton made of chitin. The
echinoderms possess a spiny skin. Their most distinctive feature is the presence
of water vascular system. The hemichordates are a small group of worm-like marine
animals. They have a cylindrical body with proboscis, collar and trunk.
Phylum Chordata includes animals which possess a notochord either
throughout or during early embryonic life. Other common features observed in
the chordates are the dorsal, hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal gill slits.
Some of the vertebrates do not possess jaws (Agnatha) whereas most of them possess
jaws (Gnathostomata). Agnatha is represented by the class, Cyclostomata. They
are the most primitive chordates and are ectoparasites on fishes. Gnathostomata
has two super classes, Pisces and Tetrapoda. Classes Chondrichthyes and
Osteichthyes bear fins for locomotion and are grouped under Pisces. The
Chondrichthyes are fishes with cartilaginous endoskeleton and are marine. Classes,
Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia have two pairs of limbs and are thus
grouped under Tetrapoda. The amphibians have adapted to live both on land and
water. Reptiles are characterised by the presence of dry and cornified skin. Limbs
are absent in snakes. Fishes, amphibians and reptiles are poikilothermous (coldblooded). Aves are warm-blooded animals with feathers on their bodies and
forelimbs modified into wings for flying. Hind limbs are adapted for walking,
swimming, perching or clasping. The unique features of mammals are the presence
of mammary glands and hairs on the skin. They commonly exhibit viviparity.

2021-22

62

BIOLOGY

EXERCISES
1. What are the difficulties that you would face in classification of animals, if common
fundamental features are not taken into account?
2. If you are given a specimen, what are the steps that you would follow to classify
it?
3. How useful is the study of the nature of body cavity and coelom in the
classification of animals?
4. Distinguish between intracellular and extracellular digestion?
5. What is the difference between direct and indirect development?
6. What are the peculiar features that you find in parasitic platyhelminthes?
7. What are the reasons that you can think of for the arthropods to constitute the
largest group of the animal kingdom?
8. Water vascular system is the characteristic of which group of the following:
(a) Porifera (b) Ctenophora (c) Echinodermata (d) Chordata
9. “All vertebrates are chordates but all chordates are not vertebrates”. Justify the
statement.
10. How important is the presence of air bladder in Pisces?
11. What are the modifications that are observed in birds that help them fly?
12. Could the number of eggs or young ones produced by an oviparous and viviparous
mother be equal? Why?
13. Segmentation in the body is first observed in which of the following:
(a) Platyhelminthes (b) Aschelminthes (c) Annelida (d) Arthropoda
14. Match the following:
(a) Operculum

(i) Ctenophora

(b) Parapodia

(ii) Mollusca

(c) Scales

(iii) Porifera

(d) Comb plates

(iv) Reptilia

(e) Radula

(v) Annelida

(f ) Hairs

(vi) Cyclostomata and Chondrichthyes

(g) Choanocytes

(vii) Mammalia

(h) Gill slits

(viii) Osteichthyes

15. Prepare a list of some animals that are found parasitic on human beings.

2021-22

