BIOLOGY

100

C HAPTER 7
S TRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN
ANIMALS
7.1 Animal Tissues
7.2 Organ and Organ
System
7.3 Earthworm
7.4 Cockroach
7.5 Frogs

In the preceding chapters you came across a large variety of organisms,
both unicellular and multicellular, of the animal kingdom. In unicellular
organisms, all functions like digestion, respiration and reproduction
are performed by a single cell. In the complex body of multicellular
animals the same basic functions are carried out by different groups of
cells in a well organised manner. The body of a simple organism like
Hydra is made of different types of cells and the number of cells in each
type can be in thousands. The human body is composed of billions of
cells to perform various functions. How do these cells in the body work
together? In multicellular animals, a group of similar cells alongwith
intercellular substances perform a specific function. Such an organisation
is called tissue.
You may be surprised to know that all complex animals consist of
only four basic types of tissues. These tissues are organised in specific
proportion and pattern to form an organ like stomach, lung, heart and
kidney. When two or more organs perform a common function by their
physical and/or chemical interaction, they together form organ system,
e.g., digestive system, respiratory system, etc. Cells, tissues, organs and
organ systems split up the work in a way that exhibits division of labour
and contribute to the survival of the body as a whole.

7.1 ANIMAL TISSUES
The structure of the cells vary according to their function. Therefore, the
tissues are different and are broadly classified into four types : (i) Epithelial,
(ii) Connective, (iii) Muscular and (iv) Neural.

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

101

7.1.1 Epithelial Tissue
We commonly refer to an epithelial tissue as epithelium (pl.: epithelia).
This tissue has a free surface, which faces either a body fluid or the outside
environment and thus provides a covering or a lining for some part of the
body. The cells are compactly packed with little intercellular matrix. There
are two types of epithelial tissues namely simple epithelium and
compound epithelium. Simple epithelium is composed of a single layer
of cells and functions as a lining for body cavities, ducts, and tubes. The
compound epithelium consists of two or more cell layers and has protective
function as it does in our skin.
On the basis of structural modification of the cells, simple epithelium
is further divided into three types. These are (i) Squamous, (ii) Cuboidal,
(iii) Columnar (Figure 7.1).

Flattened cell

(a)

Cube-like cell

(b)
Tall cell

(d)

(c)

Figure 7.1 Simple epithelium: (a) Squamous (b) Cuboidal (c) Columnar
(d) Columnar cells bearing cilia

The squamous epithelium is made of a single thin layer of flattened
cells with irregular boundaries. They are found in the walls of blood vessels
and air sacs of lungs and are involved in functions like forming a diffusion
boundary. The cuboidal epithelium is composed of a single layer of
cube-like cells. This is commonly found in ducts of glands and tubular
parts of nephrons in kidneys and its main functions are secretion and
absorption. The epithelium of proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) of
nephron in the kidney has microvilli. The columnar epithelium is
composed of a single layer of tall and slender cells. Their nuclei are located
at the base. Free surface may have microvilli. They are found in the lining
of stomach and intestine and help in secretion and absorption. If the
columnar or cuboidal cells bear cilia on their free surface they are called
ciliated epithelium (Figure 7.1d). Their function is to move particles or
mucus in a specific direction over the epithelium. They are mainly present
in the inner surface of hollow organs like bronchioles and fallopian tubes.

2021-22

BIOLOGY

102

unicellular
gland

Multicelluar
gland

(a)
Figure 7.2

(b)
Glandular epithelium : (a) Unicellular
(b) Multicellular

Multilayered
cells

Figure 7.3 Compound epithelium

Some of the columnar or cuboidal cells
get specialised for secretion and are called
glandular epithelium (Figure 7.2). They
are mainly of two types: unicellular,
consisting of isolated glandular cells (goblet
cells of the alimentary canal), and
multicellular, consisting of cluster of cells
(salivary gland). On the basis of the mode of
pouring of their secretions, glands are
divided into two categories namely
exocrine and endocrine glands. Exocrine
glands secrete mucus, saliva, earwax, oil,
milk, digestive enzymes and other cell
products. These products are released
through ducts or tubes. In contrast,
endocrine glands do not have ducts. Their
products called hormones are secreted
directly into the fluid bathing the gland.
Compound epithelium is made of more
than one layer (multi-layered) of cells and thus
has a limited role in secretion and absorption
(Figure 7.3). Their main function is to provide
protection against chemical and mechanical
stresses. They cover the dry surface of the skin,
the moist surface of buccal cavity, pharynx,
inner lining of ducts of salivary glands and of
pancreatic ducts.

All cells in epithelium are held together with little intercellular material.
In nearly all animal tissues, specialised junctions provide both structural
and functional links between its individual cells. Three types of cell junctions
are found in the epithelium and other tissues. These are called as tight,
adhering and gap junctions. Tight junctions help to stop substances
from leaking across a tissue. Adhering junctions perform cementing to
keep neighbouring cells together. Gap junctions facilitate the cells to
communicate with each other by connecting the cytoplasm of adjoining
cells, for rapid transfer of ions, small molecules and sometimes big molecules.

7.1.2 Connective Tissue
Connective tissues are most abundant and widely distributed in the body
of complex animals. They are named connective tissues because of their
special function of linking and supporting other tissues/organs of the
body. They range from soft connective tissues to specialised types, which

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

103

Macrophage
Fat storage
area

Fibroblast

Nucleus

Collagen
fibers
fibres

Plasma
Membrane

(a)

(b)

Mast
cell

Figure 7.4 Loose connective tissue : (a) Areolar tissue (b) Adipose tissue

include cartilage, bone, adipose, and blood. In all
connective tissues except blood, the cells secrete fibres of
structural proteins called collagen or elastin. The fibres
provide strength, elasticity and flexibility to the tissue.
These cells also secrete modified polysaccharides, which
accumulate between cells and fibres and act as
matrix (ground substance). Connective tissues are
classified into three types: (i) Loose connective tissue,
(ii) Dense connective tissue and (iii) Specialised
connective tissue.
Loose connective tissue has cells and fibres loosely
arranged in a semi-fluid ground substance, for example,
areolar tissue present beneath the skin (Figure 7.4). Often
it serves as a support framework for epithelium. It
contains fibroblasts (cells that produce and secrete fibres),
macrophages and mast cells. Adipose tissue is another
type of loose connective tissue located mainly beneath the
skin. The cells of this tissue are specialised to store fats.
The excess of nutrients which are not used immediately
are converted into fats and are stored in this tissue.
Fibres and fibroblasts are compactly packed in the
dense connective tissues. Orientation of fibres show a
regular or irregular pattern and are called dense regular
and dense irregular tissues. In the dense regular
connective tissues, the collagen fibres are present in rows
between many parallel bundles of fibres. Tendons, which
attach skeletal muscles to bones and ligaments which
attach one bone to another are examples of this tissue.
Dense irregular connective tissue has fibroblasts and
many fibres (mostly collagen) that are oriented differently
(Figure 7.5). This tissue is present in the skin. Cartilage,

2021-22

(a)
Collagen fibre

(b)

Figure 7.5 Dense connective tissue:
(a) Dense regular
(b) Dense irregular

BIOLOGY

104

(a)

(b)

RBC
Platelets
WBC

(c)
Figure 7.6 Specialised connective
tissues : (a) Cartilage
(b) Bone (c) Blood

bones and blood are various types of specialised
connective tissues.
The intercellular material of cartilage is solid and pliable
and resists compression. Cells of this tissue (chondrocytes)
are enclosed in small cavities within the matrix secreted by
them (Figure 7.6a). Most of the cartilages in vertebrate
embryos are replaced by bones in adults. Cartilage is
present in the tip of nose, outer ear joints, between adjacent
bones of the vertebral column, limbs and hands in adults.
Bones have a hard and non-pliable ground substance
rich in calcium salts and collagen fibres which give bone
its strength (Figure 7.6b). It is the main tissue that provides
structural frame to the body. Bones support and protect
softer tissues and organs. The bone cells (osteocytes) are
present in the spaces called lacunae. Limb bones, such as
the long bones of the legs, serve weight-bearing functions.
They also interact with skeletal muscles attached to them
to bring about movements. The bone marrow in some bones
is the site of production of blood cells.
Blood is a fluid connective tissue containing plasma,
red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC) and platelets
(Figure 7.6c). It is the main circulating fluid that helps in
the transport of various substances. You will learn more
about blood in Chapters 17 and 18.

7.1.3 Muscle Tissue
Each muscle is made of many long, cylindrical fibres
arranged in parallel arrays. These fibres are composed of
numerous fine fibrils, called myofibrils. Muscle fibres
contract (shorten) in response to stimulation, then relax
(lengthen) and return to their uncontracted state in a
coordinated fashion. Their action moves the body to adjust
to the changes in the environment and to maintain the
positions of the various parts of the body. In general,
muscles play an active role in all the movements of the body.
Muscles are of three types, skeletal, smooth, and cardiac.
Skeletal muscle tissue is closely attached to skeletal
bones. In a typical muscle such as the biceps, striated
(striped) skeletal muscle fibres are bundled together in a
parallel fashion (Figure 7.7a). A sheath of tough connective
tissue encloses several bundles of muscle fibres (You will
learn more about this in Chapter 20).

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

105

Smooth
muscle
fibers

Striations

Striations

Nucleus

Junction
between
adjacent
cells

Nucleus

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 7.7 Muscle tissue : (a) Skeletal (striated) muscle tissue (b) Smooth muscle tissue
(c) Cardiac muscle tissue

The smooth muscle fibres taper at both ends (fusiform) and do not
show striations (Figure 7.7b). Cell junctions hold them together and they
are bundled together in a connective tissue sheath. The wall of internal
organs such as the blood vessels, stomach and intestine contains this type
of muscle tissue. Smooth muscles are ‘involuntary’ as their functioning
cannot be directly controlled. We usually are not able to make it contract
merely by thinking about it as we can do with skeletal muscles.
Cardiac muscle tissue is a contractile tissue present only in the heart.
Cell junctions fuse the plasma membranes of cardiac muscle cells and
make them stick together (Figure 7.7c). Communication junctions
(intercalated discs) at some fusion points allow the cells to contract as a
unit, i.e., when one cell receives a signal to contract, its neighbours are
also stimulated to contract.

7.1.4 Neural Tissue
Neural tissue exerts the greatest control over
the body’s responsiveness to changing
conditions. Neurons, the unit of neural
system are excitable cells (Figure 7.8). The
neuroglial cell which constitute the rest of
the neural system protect and support
neurons. Neuroglia make up more than onehalf the volume of neural tissue in our body.
When a neuron is suitably stimulated,
an electrical disturbance is generated
which swiftly travels along its plasma

Axon

Cell
body
with
nucleus
Dendrite

Neuroglea
Figure 7.8 Neural tissue (Neuron with
neuroglea)

2021-22

BIOLOGY

106

membrane. Arrival of the disturbance at the neuron’s endings, or output
zone, triggers events that may cause stimulation or inhibition of adjacent
neurons and other cells (You will study the details in Chapter 21).

7.2 ORGAN AND ORGAN SYSTEM
The basic tissues mentioned above organise to form organs which in turn
associate to form organ systems in the multicellular organisms. Such an
organisation is essential for more efficient and better coordinated activities
of millions of cells constituting an organism. Each organ in our body is
made of one or more type of tissues. For example, our heart consists of all
the four types of tissues, i.e., epithelial, connective, muscular and neural.
We also notice, after some careful study that the complexity in organ and
organ systems displays certain discernable trend. This discernable trend
is called evolutionary trend (You will study the details in class XII). You
are being introduced to morphology and anatomy of three organisms at
different evolutionary levels to show their organisation and functioning.
Morphology refers to study of form or externally visible features. In the
case of plants or microbes, the term morphology precisely means only
this. In case of animals this refers to the external appearance of the organs
or parts of the body. The word anatomy conventionally is used for the
study of morphology of internal organs in the animals. You will learn the
morphology and anatomy of earthworm, cockroach and frog representing
invertebrates and vertebrates.

7.3 EARTHWORM
Earthworm is a reddish brown terrestrial invertebrate that inhabits the
upper layer of the moist soil. During day time, they live in burrows made
by boring and swallowing the soil. In the gardens, they can be traced by
their faecal deposits known as worm castings. The common Indian
earthworms are Pheretima and Lumbricus.

7.3.1 Morphology
Earthworms have long cylindrical body. The body is divided into more
than hundred short segments which are similar (metameres about
100-120 in number). The dorsal surface of the body is marked by a dark
median mid dorsal line (dorsal blood vessel) along the longitudinal axis of
the body. The ventral surface is distinguished by the presence of genital
openings (pores). Anterior end consists of the mouth and the prostomium,
a lobe which serves as a covering for the mouth and as a wedge to force
open cracks in the soil into which the earthworm may crawl. The prostomium
is sensory in function. The first body segment is called the peristomium
(buccal segment) which contains the mouth. In a mature worm, segments

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

107

Figure 7.9 Body of earthworm : (a) dorsal view (b) ventral view (c) lateral view
showing mouth opening

14-16 are covered by a prominent dark band of glandular tissue called
clitellum. Thus the body is divisible into three prominent regions –
preclitellar, clitellar and postclitellar segments (Figure 7.9).
Four pairs of spermathecal apertures are situated on the ventro-lateral
sides of the intersegmental grooves, i.e., 5th -9th segments. A single female
genital pore is present in the mid-ventral line of 14th segment. A pair of
male genital pores are present on the ventro-lateral sides of the 18th
segment. Numerous minute pores called nephridiopores open on the
surface of the body. In each body segment, except the first, last and
clitellum, there are rows of S-shaped setae, embedded in the epidermal
pits in the middle of each segment. Setae can be extended or retracted.
Their principal role is in locomotion.

7.3.2 Anatomy
The body wall of the earthworm is covered externally by a thin non-cellular
cuticle below which is the epidermis, two muscle layers (circular and
longitudinal) and an innermost coelomic epithelium. The epidermis is made

2021-22

BIOLOGY

108

4
5
6

3

2

1

7
8
9

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Figure 7.10

Mouth
Pharynx

Oesophagus
Gizzard
Stomach

Pre-typhlosolar
part of intestine

Intestinal
caecum

Lymph gland
Typhlosolar
part of intestine
Intestinal lumen
Typhlosole

Alimentary canal of earthworm

2021-22

up of a single layer of columnar epithelial cells
which contain secretory gland cells.
The alimentary canal is a straight tube and
runs between first to last segment of the body.
(Figure 7.10). A terminal mouth opens into the
buccal cavity (1-3 segments) which leads into
muscular pharynx. A small narrow tube,
oesophagus (5-7 segments), continues into a
muscular gizzard (8-9 segments). It helps in
grinding the soil particles and decaying leaves,
etc. The stomach extends from 9-14 segments.
The food of the earthworm is decaying leaves and
organic matter mixed with soil. Calciferous
glands, present in the stomach, neutralise the
humic acid present in humus. Intestine starts
from the 15th segment onwards and continues
till the last segment. A pair of short and conical
intestinal caecae project from the intestine on the
26th segment. The characteristic feature of the
intestine after 26th segment except the last
23rd-25th segments is the presence of internal
median fold of dorsal wall called typhlosole. This
increases the effective area of absorption in the
intestine. The alimentary canal opens to the
exterior by a small rounded aperture called anus.
The ingested organic rich soil passes through the
digestive tract where digestive enzymes
breakdown complex food into smaller absorbable
units. These simpler molecules are absorbed
through intestinal membranes and are utilised.
Pheretima exhibits a closed type of
blood vascular system, consisting of blood
vessels, capillaries and heart. (Figure 7.11). Due
to closed circulatory system, blood is confined
to the heart and blood vessels. Contractions
keep blood circulating in one direction. Smaller
blood vessels supply the gut, nerve cord, and
the body wall. Blood glands are present on the
4th, 5th and 6th segments. They produce blood
cells and haemoglobin which is dissolved in
blood plasma. Blood cells are phagocytic in
nature. Earthworms lack specialised breathing
devices. Respiratory exchange occurs through
moist body surface into their blood stream.

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

109

Figure 7.11 Closed circulatory system

The excretory organs occur as segmentally
arranged coiled tubules called nephridia
(sing.: nephridium). They are of three types:
(i) septal nephridia, present on both the sides of
intersegmental septa of segment 15 to the last
that open into intestine, (ii) integumentary
nephridia, attached to lining of the body wall of
segment 3 to the last that open on the body
surface and (iii) pharyngeal nephridia, present
as three paired tufts in the 4th, 5th and 6th
segments (Figure 7.12). These different types of
nephridia are basically similar in structure.
Nephridia regulate the volume and composition
of the body fluids. A nephridium starts out as a
funnel that collects excess fluid from coelomic
chamber. The funnel connects with a tubular part
of the nephridium which delivers the wastes
through a pore to the surface in the body wall
into the digestive tube.
Nervous system is basically represented by
ganglia arranged segmentwise on the ventral
paired nerve cord. The nerve cord in the anterior
region (3rd and 4th segments) bifurcates, laterally
Figure 7.12 Nephridial system in earthworm
encircling the pharynx and joins the cerebral
ganglia dorsally to form a nerve ring. The cerebral
ganglia alongwith other nerves in the ring
integrate sensory input as well as command
muscular responses of the body.

2021-22

BIOLOGY

110

Sensory system does not have eyes but does
possess light and touch sensitive organs (receptor
cells) to distinguish the light intensities and to feel
the vibrations in the ground. Worms have
specialised chemoreceptors (taste receptors) which
react to chemical stimuli. These sense organs are
located on the anterior part of the worm.
Earthworm is hermaphrodite (bisexual), i.e.,
testes and ovaries are present in the same
individual (Figure 7.13). There are two pairs of
testes present in the 10th and 11th segments.
Their vasa deferentia run up to the 18th segment
where they join the prostatic duct. Two pairs of
accessory glands are present one pair each in
the 17th and 19th segments. The common prostate
and spermatic duct (vasa deferentia) opens to
the exterior by a pair of male genital pores on
the ventro-lateral side of the 18th segment. Four
pairs of spermathecae are located in 6th-9th
segments (one pair in each segment). They receive
and store spermatozoa during copulation. One
pair of ovaries is attached at the inter-segmental
septum of the 12th and 13th segments. Ovarian
funnels are present beneath the ovaries which
continue into oviduct, join together and open on
the ventral side as a single median female genital
pore on the 14th segment.
A mutual exchange of sperm occurs between
two worms during mating. One worm has to find
another worm and they mate juxtaposing
opposite gonadal openings exchanging packets
of sperms called spermatophores. Mature sperm
and egg cells and nutritive fluid are deposited in
cocoons produced by the gland cells of clitellum.
Fertilisation and development occur within the
Figure 7.13 Reproductive system of earthworm cocoons which are deposited in soil. The ova
(eggs) are fertilised by the sperm cells within the
cocoon which then slips off the worm and is
deposited in or on the soil. The cocoon holds the
worm embryos. After about 3 weeks, each cocoon
produces two to twenty baby worms with an
average of four. Development of earthworms is
direct, i.e., there is no larva formed.

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

111

Earthworms are known as ‘friends of farmers’ because they make
burrows in the soil and make it porous which helps in respiration and
penetration of the developing plant roots. The process of increasing fertility
of soil by the earthworms is called vermicomposting. They are also used
as bait in game fishing.

7.4 COCKROACH
Cockroaches are brown or black bodied animals that are included in
class Insecta of Phylum Arthropoda. Bright yellow, red and green coloured
cockroaches have also been reported in tropical regions. Their size ranges
from ¼ inches to 3 inches (0.6-7.6 cm) and have long antenna, legs and
flat extension of the upper body wall that conceals head. They are
nocturnal omnivores that live in damp places throughout the world. They
have become residents of human homes and thus are serious pests and
vectors of several diseases.

7.4.1 Morphology
The adults of the common species of cockroach, Periplaneta americana
are about 34-53 mm long with wings that extend beyond the tip of the
abdomen in males. The body of the cockroach is segmented and divisible
into three distinct regions – head, thorax and abdomen (Figure 7.14).
The entire body is covered by a hard chitinous exoskeleton (brown in
colour). In each segment, exoskeleton has hardened plates called sclerites
(tergites dorsally and sternites ventrally) that are joined to each other by
a thin and flexible articular membrane (arthrodial membrane).

Figure 7.14 External features of cockroach

2021-22

BIOLOGY

112

Head is triangular in shape and lies anteriorly at right angles to the
longitudinal body axis. It is formed by the fusion of six segments and
shows great mobility in all directions due to flexible neck (Figure 7.15).
The head capsule bears a pair of compound eyes. A pair of thread like
antennae arise from membranous sockets lying in front of eyes. Antennae
have sensory receptors that help in monitoring the environment. Anterior
end of the head bears appendages forming biting and chewing type of
mouth parts. The mouthparts consisting of a labrum (upper lip), a pair
of mandibles, a pair of maxillae and a labium (lower lip). A median flexible
lobe, acting as tongue (hypopharynx), lies within the cavity enclosed by
the mouthparts (Figure 7.15b). Thorax consists of three parts – prothorax,
mesothorax and metathorax. The head is connected with thorax by a
short extension of the prothorax known as the neck. Each thoracic segment
bears a pair of walking legs. The first pair of wings arises from mesothorax
and the second pair from metathorax. Forewings (mesothoracic) called
tegmina are opaque dark and leathery and cover the hind wings when at
rest. The hind wings are transparent, membranous and are used in flight.
The abdomen in both males and females consists of 10 segments. In
females, the 7th sternum is boat shaped and together with the 8th and 9th
sterna forms a brood or genital pouch whose anterior part contains female
gonopore, spermathecal pores and collateral glands. In males, genital pouch
or chamber lies at the hind end of abdomen bounded dorsally by 9th and
10th terga and ventrally by the 9th sternum. It contains dorsal anus, ventral
male genital pore and gonapophysis. Males bear a pair of short, threadlike anal styles which are absent in females. In both sexes, the 10th segment
bears a pair of jointed filamentous structures called anal cerci.
Ocellus
Compound eye
Grinding
region
Incising
Mandible region

Labrum

Mandible

Hypopharynx

Maxilla
Mandible
Labrum

(a)

Maxilla

Labium

Labium
(b)

Figure 7.15 Head region of cockroach : (a) parts of head region (b) mouth parts

2021-22

Maxilla

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

113

7.4.2 Anatomy

Salivary gland

Pharynx

The alimentary canal present in the body cavity
Salivary
is divided into three regions: foregut, midgut
reservoir
and hindgut (Figure 7.16). The mouth opens
Oesophagus
into a short tubular pharynx, leading to a
narrow tubular passage called oesophagus.
Crop
This in turn opens into a sac like structure
called crop used for storing of food. The crop
Gizzard
is followed by gizzard or proventriculus. It has
an outer layer of thick circular muscles and
Hepatic caeca
thick inner cuticle forming six highly chitinous
plate called teeth. Gizzard helps in grinding the
Mesenteron
or midgut
food particles. The entire foregut is lined by
cuticle. A ring of 6-8 blind tubules called
Malpighian
tubules
hepatic or gastric caeca is present at the
Rectum
junction of foregut and midgut, which secrete
Ileum
digestive juice. At the junction of midgut and
Colon
hindgut is present another ring of 100-150
yellow coloured thin filamentous Malpighian
Figure 7.16 Alimentary canal of cockroach
tubules. They help in removal of excretory
products from haemolymph. The hindgut is
broader than midgut and is differentiated into
ileum, colon and rectum. The rectum opens
Anterior aorta
out through anus.
Blood vascular system of cockroach is an
open type (Figure 7.17). Blood vessels are
Alary muscles
poorly developed and open into space
(haemocoel). Visceral organs located in the
haemocoel are bathed in blood (haemolymph).
The haemolymph is composed of colourless
plasma and haemocytes. Heart of cockroach
consists of elongated muscular tube lying
along mid dorsal line of thorax and abdomen.
It is differentiated into funnel shaped chambers
with ostia on either side. Blood from sinuses
Chambers
enter heart through ostia and is pumped
of heart
anteriorly to sinuses again.
The respiratory system consists of a
network of trachea, that open through 10 pairs
of small holes called spiracles present on the
lateral side of the body. Thin branching tubes
(tracheal tubes subdivided into tracheoles)
carry oxygen from the air to all the parts. The Figure 7.17 Open circulatory system of cockroach

2021-22

BIOLOGY

114

opening of the spiracles is regulated by the sphincters. Exchange of gases
take place at the tracheoles by diffusion.
Excretion is performed by Malpighian tubules. Each tubule is lined
by glandular and ciliated cells. They absorb nitrogenous waste products
and convert them into uric acid which is excreted out through the hindgut.
Therefore, this insect is called uricotelic. In addition, the fat body,
nephrocytes and urecose glands also help in excretion.
The nervous system of cockroach consists of a series of fused,
segmentally arranged ganglia joined by paired longitudinal connectives
on the ventral side. Three ganglia lie in the thorax, and six in the abdomen.
The nervous system of cockroach is spread throughout the body. The
head holds a bit of a nervous system while the rest is situated along the
ventral (belly-side) part of its body. So, now you understand that if the
head of a cockroach is cut off, it will still live for as long as one week. In
the head region, the brain is represented by supra-oesophageal ganglion
which supplies nerves to antennae and compound eyes. In cockroach,
the sense organs are antennae, eyes, maxillary palps, labial palps, anal
cerci, etc. The compound eyes are situated at the dorsal surface of the
head. Each eye consists of about 2000 hexagonal ommatidia
(sing.: ommatidium). With the help of several ommatidia, a cockroach can
receive several images of an object. This kind of vision is known as mosaic
vision with more sensitivity but less resolution, being common during
night (hence called nocturnal vision).
Cockroaches are dioecious and both sexes have well developed
reproductive organs (Figure 7.18). Male reproductive system consists of
a pair of testes one lying on each lateral side in the 4th -6th abdominal
segments. From each testis arises a thin vas deferens, which opens into
ejaculatory duct through seminal vesicle. The ejaculatory duct opens into
male gonopore situated ventral to anus. A characteristic mushroomshaped gland is present in the 6th-7th abdominal segments which functions
as an accessory reproductive gland. The external genitalia are represented
by male gonapophysis or phallomere (chitinous asymmetrical structures,
surrounding the male gonopore). The sperms are stored in the seminal
vesicles and are glued together in the form of bundles called
spermatophores which are discharged during copulation. The female
reproductive sysytem consists of two large ovaries, lying laterally in the
2nd – 6th abdominal segments. Each ovary is formed of a group of eight
ovarian tubules or ovarioles, containing a chain of developing ova.
Oviducts of each ovary unite into a single median oviduct (also called
vagina) which opens into the genital chamber. A pair of spermatheca is
present in the 6th segment which opens into the genital chamber.
Sperms are transferred through spermatophores. Their fertilised eggs
are encased in capsules called oothecae. Ootheca is a dark reddish to
blackish brown capsule, about 3/8" (8 mm) long. They are dropped or

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

115

Testis
Phallic gland
Small tubules
Long tubules
Seminal vesicle
Vas deferens
Ejaculatory duct
Right phallomere
Ventral phallomere
Anal cercus
Caudal style
Left phallomere

Pseudopenis
Titillator

(a)

Ovary
Oviduct

Spermatheca

Common oviduct
or vagina
Collaterial glands
Genital chamber
gonapophyses

Vestibulum

(b)

]

Genital
pouch

Figure 7.18 Reproductive system of cockroach : (a) male (b) female

glued to a suitable surface, usually in a crack or crevice of high relative
humidity near a food source. On an average, females produce 9-10
oothecae, each containing 14-16 eggs. The development of P. americana
is paurometabolous, meaning there is development through nymphal
stage. The nymphs look very much like adults. The nymph grows by
moulting about 13 times to reach the adult form. The next to last nymphal
stage has wing pads but only adult cockroaches have wings.
Many species of cockroaches are wild and are of no known economic
importance yet. A few species thrive in and around human habitat. They are
pests because they spoil food and contaminate it with their smelly excreta.
They can transmit a variety of bacterial diseases by contaminating food material.

2021-22

BIOLOGY

116

7.5 FROGS
Frogs can live both on land and in freshwater and belong to class
Amphibia of phylum Chordata. The most common species of frog found
in India is Rana tigrina.
They do not have constant body temperature i.e., their body
temperature varies with the temperature of the environment. Such animals
are called cold blooded or poikilotherms. You might have also noticed
changes in the colour of the frogs while they are in grasses and on dry
land. They have the ability to change the colour to hide them from their
enemies (camouflage). This protective coloration is called mimicry. You
may also know that frogs are not seen during peak summer and winter.
During this period they take shelter in deep burrows to protect them
from extreme heat and cold. This is known as summer sleep (aestivation)
and winter sleep (hibernation) respectively.

7.5.1 Morphology

Trunk

Have you ever touched the skin of frog? The skin is smooth and slippery
due to the presence of mucus. The skin is always maintained in a moist
condition. The colour of dorsal side of body is generally olive green with
dark irregular spots. On the ventral side the skin is uniformly pale yellow.
The frog never drinks water but absorb it through the skin.
Body of a frog is divisible into head and trunk (Figure 7.19). A neck
and tail are absent. Above the mouth, a pair of nostrils is present. Eyes
are bulged and covered by a nictitating membrane that protects them
while in water. On either side of eyes a membranous
Head
tympanum (ear) receives sound signals. The
forelimbs and hind limbs help in swimming,
Eye
walking, leaping and burrowing. The hind limbs end
in five digits and they are larger and muscular than
fore limbs that end in four digits. Feet have webbed
digits that help in swimming. Frogs exhibit sexual
dimorphism. Male frogs can be distinguished by the
Fore limb
presence of sound producing vocal sacs and also a
copulatory pad on the first digit of the fore limbs
Hind limb
which are absent in female frogs.

Figure 7.19 External features of frog

7.5.2 Anatomy
The body cavity of frogs accommodate different organ systems such as
digestive, circulatory, respiratory, nervous, excretory and reproductive
systems with well developed structures and functions (Figure 7.20).
The digestive system consists of alimentary canal and digestive glands.
The alimentary canal is short because frogs are carnivores and hence the
length of intestine is reduced. The mouth opens into the buccal cavity that

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

117

Heart

Oesophagus

Liver
Gall
bladder
Lung
Stomach
Fat bodies
Kidney

Ureter

Intestine

Urinary
bladder

Rectum

Cloaca
Cloacal Aperture
Figure 7.20 Diagrammatic representation of internal organs of frog showing
complete digestive system

leads to the oesophagus through pharynx. Oesophagus is a short tube
that opens into the stomach which in turn continues as the intestine, rectum
and finally opens outside by the cloaca. Liver secretes bile that is stored in
the gall bladder. Pancreas, a digestive gland produces pancreatic juice
containing digestive enzymes. Food is captured by the bilobed tongue.
Digestion of food takes place by the action of HCl and gastric juices secreted
from the walls of the stomach. Partially digested food called chyme is passed
from stomach to the first part of the small intestine, the duodenum. The
duodenum receives bile from gall bladder and pancreatic juices from the
pancreas through a common bile duct. Bile emulsifies fat and pancreatic
juices digest carbohydrates and proteins. Final digestion takes place in the
intestine. Digested food is absorbed by the numerous finger-like folds in
the inner wall of intestine called villi and microvilli. The undigested solid
waste moves into the rectum and passes out through cloaca.
Frogs respire on land and in the water by two different methods. In
water, skin acts as aquatic respiratory organ (cutaneous respiration).
Dissolved oxygen in the water is exchanged through the skin by diffusion.

2021-22

BIOLOGY

118

On land, the buccal cavity, skin and lungs act as the respiratory organs.
The respiration by lungs is called pulmonary respiration. The lungs are
a pair of elongated, pink coloured sac-like structures present in the upper
part of the trunk region (thorax). Air enters through the nostrils into the
buccal cavity and then to lungs. During aestivation and hibernation
gaseous exchange takes place through skin.
The vascular system of frog is well-developed closed type. Frogs have
a lymphatic system also. The blood vascular system involves heart, blood
vessels and blood. The lymphatic system consists of lymph, lymph
channels and lymph nodes. Heart is a muscular structure situated in the
upper part of the body cavity. It has three chambers, two atria and one
ventricle and is covered by a membrane called pericardium. A triangular
structure called sinus venosus joins the right atrium. It receives blood
through the major veins called vena cava. The ventricle opens into a saclike conus arteriosus on the ventral side of the heart. The blood from the
heart is carried to all parts of the body by the arteries (arterial system).
The veins collect blood from different parts of body to the heart and form
the venous system. Special venous connection between liver and intestine
as well as the kidney and lower parts of the body are present in frogs. The
former is called hepatic portal system and the latter is called renal portal
system. The blood is composed of plasma and cells. The blood cells are
RBC (red blood cells) or erythrocytes, WBC (white blood cells) or leucocytes
and platelets. RBC’s are nucleated and contain red coloured pigment
namely haemoglobin. The lymph is different from blood. It lacks few
proteins and RBCs. The blood carries nutrients, gases and water to the
respective sites during the circulation. The circulation of blood is achieved
by the pumping action of the muscular heart.
The elimination of nitrogenous wastes is carried out by a well
developed excretory system. The excretory system consists of a pair of
kidneys, ureters, cloaca and urinary bladder. These are compact, dark
red and bean like structures situated a little posteriorly in the body cavity
on both sides of vertebral column. Each kidney is composed of several
structural and functional units called uriniferous tubules or nephrons.
Two ureters emerge from the kidneys in the male frogs. The ureters act as
urinogenital duct which opens into the cloaca. In females the ureters and
oviduct open seperately in the cloaca. The thin-walled urinary bladder is
present ventral to the rectum which also opens in the cloaca. The frog
excretes urea and thus is a ureotelic animal. Excretory wastes are carried
by blood into the kidney where it is separated and excreted.
The system for control and coordination is highly evolved in the frog. It
includes both neural system and endocrine glands. The chemical
coordination of various organs of the body is achieved by hormones which
are secreted by the endocrine glands. The prominent endocrine glands
found in frog are pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, thymus, pineal body,
pancreatic islets, adrenals and gonads. The nervous system is organised

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

119

into a central nervous system (brain and spinal
cord), a peripheral nervous system (cranial and
spinal nerves) and an autonomic nervous system
(sympathetic and parasympathetic). There are ten
pairs of cranial nerves arising from the brain. Brain
is enclosed in a bony structure called brain box
(cranium). The brain is divided into fore-brain,
mid-brain and hind-brain. Forebrain includes
olfactory lobes, paired cerebral hemispheres and
unpaired diencephalon. The midbrain is
characterised by a pair of optic lobes. Hind-brain
consists of cerebellum and medulla oblongata.
The medulla oblongata passes out through the
foramen magnum and continues into spinal cord,
which is enclosed in the vertebral column.
Frog has different types of sense organs, namely
organs of touch (sensory papillae), taste (taste
buds), smell (nasal epithelium), vision (eyes) and
hearing (tympanum with internal ears). Out of
these, eyes and internal ears are well-organised
structures and the rest are cellular aggregations
around nerve endings. Eyes in a frog are a pair of
spherical structures situated in the orbit in skull.
These are simple eyes (possessing only one unit).
External ear is absent in frogs and only tympanum
can be seen externally. The ear is an organ of
hearing as well as balancing (equilibrium).
Frogs have well organised male and female
reproductive systems. Male reproductive organs
consist of a pair of yellowish ovoid testes (Figure
7.21), which are found adhered to the upper part
of kidneys by a double fold of peritoneum called
mesorchium. Vasa efferentia are 10-12 in
number that arise from testes. They enter the
kidneys on their side and open into Bidder’s
canal. Finally it communicates with the
urinogenital duct that comes out of the kidneys
and opens into the cloaca. The cloaca is a small,
median chamber that is used to pass faecal
matter, urine and sperms to the exterior.
The female reproductive organs include a pair
of ovaries (Figure 7.22). The ovaries are situated
near kidneys and there is no functional
connection with kidneys. A pair of oviduct arising

Vasa
efferentia
Fat
bodies
Testis

Adrenal
gland

2021-22

Kidney

Urino
genital duct

Rectum
Urinary
bladder

Cloaca
Cloacal
aperture

Figure 7.21 Male reproductive system

Oviduct

Ovary
Ova

Ureter

Cloaca
Cloacal aperture
Urinary
bladder
Figure 7.22 Female reproductive system

BIOLOGY

120

from the ovaries opens into the cloaca separately. A mature female can
lay 2500 to 3000 ova at a time. Fertilisation is external and takes place in
water. Development involves a larval stage called tadpole. Tadpole
undergoes metamorphosis to form the adult.
Frogs are beneficial for mankind because they eat insects and protect
the crop. Frogs maintain ecological balance because these serve as an
important link of food chain and food web in the ecosystem. In some
countries the muscular legs of frog are used as food by man.

SUMMARY
Cells, tissues, organs and organ systems split up the work in a way that ensures
the survival of the body as a whole and exhibit division of labour. A tissue is
defined as group of cells along with intercellular substances performing one or
more functions in the body. Epithelia are sheet like tissues lining the body’s surface
and its cavities, ducts and tubes. Epithelia have one free surface facing a body
fluid or the outside environment. Their cells are structurally and functionally
connected at junctions.
Diverse types of connective tissues bind together, support, strengthen, protect,
and insulate other tissue in the body. Soft connective tissues consist of protein
fibres as well as a variety of cells arranged in a ground substance. Cartilage, bone,
blood, and adipose tissue are specialised connective tissues. Cartilage and bone
are both structural materials. Blood is a fluid tissue with transport functions.
Adipose tissue is a reservoir of stored energy. Muscle tissue, which can contract
(shorten) in response to stimulation, helps in movement of the body and specific
body parts. Skeletal muscle is the muscle tissue attached to bones. Smooth muscle
is a component of internal organs. Cardiac muscle makes up the contractile walls
of the heart. Connective tissue covers all three types of tissues. Nervous tissue
exerts greatest control over the response of body. Neurons are the basic units of
nervous tissue.
Earthworm, Cockroach and Frog show characteristic features in body
organisation. In Pheretima posthuma (earthworm), the body is covered by cuticle.
All segments of its body are alike except the 14th, 15th and 16th segment, which are
thick and dark and glandular, forming clitellum. A ring of S-shaped chitinous
setae is found in each segment. These setae help in locomotion. On the ventral
side spermathecal openings are present in between the grooves of 5 and 6, 6 and
7, 7 and 8 and 8 and 9 segments. Female genital pores are present on 14th segment
and male genital pores on 18th segment. The alimentary canal is a narrow tube
made of mouth, buccal cavity, pharynx, gizzard, stomach, intestine and anus.
The blood vascular system is of closed type with heart and valves. Nervous system
is represented by ventral nerve cord. Earthworm is hermaphorodite. Two pairs of

2021-22

STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS

121

testes occur in the 10th and 11th segment, respectively. A pair of ovaries are present
on 12 and 13th intersegmental septum. It is a protandrous animal with crossfertilisation. Fertilisation and development take place in cocoon secreted by the
glands of clitellum.
The body of Cockroach (Periplaneta americana) is covered by chitinous
exoskeleton. It is divided into head, thorax and abdomen. Segments bear jointed
appendages. There are three segments of thorax, each bearing a pair of walking
legs. Two pairs of wings are present, one pair each on 2nd and 3rd segment. There
are ten segments in abdomen. Alimentary canal is well developed with a mouth
surrounded by mouth parts, a pharynx, oesophagus, crop, gizzard, midgut,
hindgut and anus. Hepatic caecae are present at the junction of foregut and
midgut. Malpighian tubules are present at the junction of midgut and hindgut
and help in excretion. A pair of salivary gland is present near crop. The blood
vascular system is of open type. Respiration takes place by network of tracheae.
Trachea opens outside with spiracles. Nervous system is represented by
segmentally arranged ganglia and ventral nerve cord. A pair of testes is present in
4th-6th segments and ovaries in 2nd-6th segments. Fertilisation is internal. Female
produces 9-10 ootheca bearing developing embryos. After rupturing of single
ootheca sixteen young ones, called nymphs come out.
The Indian bullfrog, Rana tigrina, is the common frog found in India. Body is
covered by skin. Mucous glands are present in the skin which is highly vascularised
and helps in respiration in water and on land. Body is divisible into head and trunk.
A muscular tongue is present, which is bilobed at the tip and is used in capturing
the prey. The alimentary canal consists of oesophagous, stomach, intestine and
rectum, which open into the cloaca. The main digestive glands are liver and pancreas.
It can respire in water through skin and through lungs on land. Circulatory system
is closed with single circulation. RBCs are nucleated. Nervous system is organised
into central, peripheral and autonomic. The organs of urinogenital system are kidneys
and urinogenital ducts, which open into the cloaca. The male reproductive organ is
a pair of testes. The female reproductive organ is a pair of ovaries. A female lays
2500-3000 ova at a time. The fertilisation and development are external. The eggs
hatch into tadpoles, which metamorphose into frogs.

EXERCISES
1. Answer in one word or one line.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)

Give the common name of Periplanata americana.
How many spermathecae are found in earthworm?
What is the position of ovaries in cockroach?
How many segments are present in the abdomen of cockroach?
Where do you find Malpighian tubules?

2021-22

BIOLOGY

122

2. Answer the following:
(i) What is the function of nephridia?
(ii) How many types of nephridia are found in earthworm based on
their location?
3. Draw a labelled diagram of the reproductive organs of an earthworm.
4. Draw a labelled diagram of alimentary canal of a cockroach.
5. Distinguish between the followings
(a) Prostomium and peristomium
(b) Septal nephridium and pharyngeal nephridium
6. What are the cellular components of blood?
7. What are the following and where do you find them in animal body.
(a) Chondriocytes
(b) Axons
(c) Ciliated epithelium
8. Describe various types of epithelial tissues with the help of labelled diagrams.
9. Distinguish between
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Simple epithelium and compound epithelium
Cardiac muscle and striated muscle
Dense regular and dense irregular connective tissues
Adipose and blood tissue
Simple gland and compound gland

10. Mark the odd one in each series:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Areolar tissue; blood; neuron; tendon
RBC; WBC; platelets; cartilage
Exocrine; endocrine; salivary gland; ligament
Maxilla; mandible; labrum; antennae
Protonema; mesothorax; metathorax; coxa

11. Match the terms in column I with those in column II:
Column I
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

Compound epithelium
Compound eye
Septal nephridia
Open circulatory system
Typhlosole
Osteocytes
Genitalia

Column II
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)

Alimentary canal
Cockroach
Skin
Mosaic vision
Earthworm
Phallomere
Bone

12. Mention breifly about the circulatory system of earthworm
13. Draw a neat diagram of digestive system of frog.
14. Mention the function of the following
(a) Ureters in frog
(b) Malpighian tubules
(c) Body wall in earthworm

2021-22

