CHAPTER

8

How do Organisms
Reproduce?

B

efore we discuss the mechanisms by which organisms reproduce,
let us ask a more basic question – why do organisms reproduce?
After all, reproduction is not necessary to maintain the life of an individual
organism, unlike the essential life processes such as nutrition,
respiration, or excretion. On the other hand, if an individual organism is
going to create more individuals, a lot of its energy will be spent in the
process. So why should an individual organism waste energy on a process
it does not need to stay alive? It would be interesting to discuss the
possible answers in the classroom!
Whatever the answer to this question, it is obvious that we notice
organisms because they reproduce. If there were to be only one, nonreproducing member of a particular kind, it is doubtful that we would
have noticed its existence. It is the large numbers of organisms belonging
to a single species that bring them to our notice. How do we know that
two different individual organisms belong to the same species? Usually,
we say this because they look similar to each other. Thus, reproducing
organisms create new individuals that look very much like themselves.

CT COPIES OF
ANISMS CREA
8.1 DO ORG
EXACT
CREATE
ORGANISMS
TE EXA
THEMSEL
VES?
THEMSELVES?
Organisms look similar because their body designs are similar. If body
designs are to be similar, the blueprints for these designs should be
similar. Thus, reproduction at its most basic level will involve making
copies of the blueprints of body design. In Class IX, we learnt that the
chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell contain information for inheritance
of features from parents to next generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid) molecules. The DNA in the cell nucleus is the information
source for making proteins. If the information is changed, different
proteins will be made. Different proteins will eventually lead to altered
body designs.
Therefore, a basic event in reproduction is the creation of a DNA
copy. Cells use chemical reactions to build copies of their DNA. This
creates two copies of the DNA in a reproducing cell, and they will need to
be separated from each other. However, keeping one copy of DNA in the
original cell and simply pushing the other one out would not work,

2020-21

because the copy pushed out would not have any organised cellular
structure for maintaining life processes. Therefore, DNA copying is
accompanied by the creation of an additional cellular apparatus, and
then the DNA copies separate, each with its own cellular apparatus.
Effectively, a cell divides to give rise to two cells.
These two cells are of course similar, but are they likely to be
absolutely identical? The answer to this question will depend on how
accurately the copying reactions involved occur. No bio-chemical reaction
is absolutely reliable. Therefore, it is only to be expected that the process
of copying the DNA will have some variations each time. As a result, the
DNA copies generated will be similar, but may not be identical to the
original. Some of these variations might be so drastic that the new DNA
copy cannot work with the cellular apparatus it inherits. Such a newborn
cell will simply die. On the other hand, there could still be many other
variations in the DNA copies that would not lead to such a drastic
outcome. Thus, the surviving cells are similar to, but subtly different
from each other. This inbuilt tendency for variation during reproduction
is the basis for evolution, as we will discuss in the next chapter.

8.1.1 The Importance of Variation
Populations of organisms fill well-defined places, or niches, in the
ecosystem, using their ability to reproduce. The consistency of DNA
copying during reproduction is important for the maintenance of body
design features that allow the organism to use that particular niche.
Reproduction is therefore linked to the stability of populations of species.
However, niches can change because of reasons beyond the control
of the organisms. Temperatures on earth can go up or down, water levels
can vary, or there could be meteorite hits, to think of a few examples. If
a population of reproducing organisms were suited to a particular niche
and if the niche were drastically altered, the population could be wiped
out. However, if some variations were to be present in a few individuals
in these populations, there would be some chance for them to survive.
Thus, if there were a population of bacteria living in temperate waters,
and if the water temperature were to be increased by global warming,
most of these bacteria would die, but the few variants resistant to heat
would survive and grow further. Variation is thus useful for the survival
of species over time.

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

What is the importance of DNA copying in reproduction?

2.

Why is variation beneficial to the species but not necessarily
for the individual?

?
Science

128

2020-21

8.2 MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE
ORGANISMS
Activity 8.1
n
n
n
n
n

Dissolve about 10 gm of sugar in 100 mL of water.
Take 20 mL of this solution in a test tube and add a pinch of yeast
granules to it.
Put a cotton plug on the mouth of the test tube and keep it in a
warm place.
After 1 or 2 hours, put a small drop of yeast culture from the test
tube on a slide and cover it with a coverslip.
Observe the slide under a microscope.

Activity 8.2
n
n
n

Wet a slice of bread, and keep it in a cool, moist and dark place.
Observe the surface of the slice with a magnifying glass.
Record your observations for a week.

Compare and contrast the ways in which yeast grows in the first
case, and how mould grows in the second.
Having discussed the context in which reproductive processes work,
let us now examine how different organisms actually reproduce. The
modes by which various organisms reproduce depend on the body
design of the organisms.

8.2.1 Fission
For unicellular organisms, cell division, or fission, leads to the creation
of new individuals. Many different patterns of fission have been observed.
Many bacteria and protozoa simply split into two equal halves during
cell division. In organisms such as Amoeba, the splitting of the two cells
during division can take place in any plane.

Activity 8.3
n
n

n

Observe a permanent slide of
Amoeba under a microscope.
Similarly
observe
another
permanent slide of Amoeba
showing binary fission.
Now, compare the observations of
both the slides.

Figure 8.1(a) Binary fission in Amoeba

However, some unicellular organisms
show somewhat more organisation of their
bodies, such as is seen in Leishmania (which
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
cause kala-azar), which have a whip-like
Figure 8.1(b) Binary fission in Leishmania
structure at one end of the cell. In such
organisms, binary fission occurs in a definite orientation in relation to

129

How do Organisms Reproduce?

2020-21

these structures. Other single-celled organisms, such as the malarial
parasite, Plasmodium, divide into many daughter cells simultaneously
by multiple fission.
Yeast, on the other hand, can put out small buds that separate and
grow further, as we saw in Activity 8.1.

8.2.2 Fragmentation
Figure 8.2
Multiple fission in
Plasmodium

Activity 8.4
n
n
n
n
n

Collect water from a lake or pond that appears dark green and
contains filamentous structures.
Put one or two filaments on a slide.
Put a drop of glycerine on these filaments and cover it with a coverslip.
Observe the slide under a microscope.
Can you identify different tissues in the Spirogyra filaments?

In multi-cellular organisms with relatively simple body organisation,
simple reproductive methods can still work. Spirogyra, for example,
simply breaks up into smaller pieces upon maturation. These pieces or
fragments grow into new individuals. Can we work out the reason for
this, based on what we saw in Activity 8.4?
This is not true for all multi-cellular organisms. They cannot simply
divide cell-by-cell. The reason is that many multi-cellular organisms, as
we have seen, are not simply a random collection of cells. Specialised
cells are organised as tissues, and tissues are organised into organs,
which then have to be placed at definite positions in the body. In such a
carefully organised situation, cell-by-cell division would be impractical.
Multi-cellular organisms, therefore, need to use more complex ways of
reproduction.
A basic strategy used in multi-cellular organisms is that different
cell types perform different specialised functions. Following this general
pattern, reproduction in such organisms is also the function of a specific
cell type. How is reproduction to be achieved from a single cell type, if
the organism itself consists of many cell types? The answer is that there
must be a single cell type in the organism that is capable of growing,
proliferating and making other cell types under the right circumstances.

8.2.3 Regeneration
Many fully differentiated organisms have the ability to give rise to new
individual organisms from their body parts. That is, if the individual is
somehow cut or broken up into many pieces, many of these pieces grow
into separate individuals. For example, simple animals like Hydra and
Planaria can be cut into any number of pieces and each piece grows
into a complete organism. This is known as regeneration (see Fig. 8.3).
Regeneration is carried out by specialised cells. These cells proliferate
and make large numbers of cells. From this mass of cells, different cells
undergo changes to become various cell types and tissues. These changes

Science

130

2020-21

take place in an organised
sequence referred to as
development. However,
regeneration is not the same
as reproduction, since most
organisms
would
not
normally depend on being cut
up to be able to reproduce.

8.2.4 Budding
Organisms such as Hydra
use regenerative cells for
reproduction in the process of
budding. In Hydra, a bud
develops as an outgrowth due
Figure 8.3 Regeneration in Planaria
to repeated cell division at one
specific site (Fig. 8.4). These buds develop into tiny individuals and when
fully mature, detach from the parent body and become new independent
individuals.

Figure 8.4 Budding in Hydra

8.2.5 Vegetative Propagation
There are many plants in which parts like the root, stem and leaves
develop into new plants under appropriate conditions. Unlike in most
animals, plants can indeed use such a mode for reproduction. This
property of vegetative propagation is used in methods such as layering
or grafting to grow many plants like sugarcane, roses, or grapes for
agricultural purposes. Plants raised by vegetative propagation can bear
flowers and fruits earlier than those produced from seeds. Such methods
also make possible the propagation of plants such as banana, orange,
rose and jasmine that have lost the capacity to produce seeds. Another
advantage of vegetative propagation is that all plants produced are
genetically similar enough to the parent plant to have all its
characteristics.

131

How do Organisms Reproduce?

2020-21

Activity 8.5
n
n
n
n
n

Take a potato and observe its surface. Can notches be seen?
Cut the potato into small pieces such that some pieces contain a
notch or bud and some do not.
Spread some cotton on a tray and wet it. Place the potato pieces
on this cotton. Note where the pieces with the buds are placed.
Observe changes taking place in these potato pieces over the next
few days. Make sure that the cotton is kept moistened.
Which are the potato pieces that give rise to fresh green shoots
and roots?

Similarly buds produced in the notches along the leaf
margin of Bryophyllum fall on the soil and develop into
new plants (Fig. 8.5).

Activity 8.6
n
n

Figure 8.5
Leaf of Bryophyllum
with buds

n
n
n

More to Know?

n

Select a money-plant.
Cut some pieces such that they contain at least
one leaf.
Cut out some other portions between two leaves.
Dip one end of all the pieces in water and observe
over the next few days.
Which ones grow and give rise to fresh leaves?
What can you conclude from your observations?

Tissue culture
In tissue culture, new plants are grown by removing tissue or separating cells from
the growing tip of a plant. The cells are then placed in an artificial medium where they
divide rapidly to form a small group of cells or callus. The callus is transferred to
another medium containing hormones for growth and differentiation. The plantlets
are then placed in the soil so that they can grow into mature plants. Using tissue
culture, many plants can be grown from one parent in disease-free conditions. This
technique is commonly used for ornamental plants.

8.2.6 Spore Formation

Figure 8.6
Spore formation in Rhizopus

Even in many simple multi-cellular organisms, specific reproductive
parts can be identified. The thread-like structures that developed on
the bread in Activity 8.2 above are the hyphae of the bread mould
(Rhizopus). They are not reproductive parts. On the other hand, the
tiny blob-on-a-stick structures are involved in reproduction. The
blobs are sporangia, which contain cells, or spores, that can
eventually develop into new Rhizopus individuals (Fig. 8.6). The spores
are covered by thick walls that protect them until they come into
contact with another moist surface and can begin to grow.

Science

132

2020-21

All the modes of reproduction that we have discussed so far allow
new generations to be created from a single individual. This is known as
asexual reproduction.

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

How does binary fission differ from multiple fission?

2.

How will an organism be benefited if it reproduces through spores?

3.

Can you think of reasons why more complex organisms cannot give
rise to new individuals through regeneration?

4.

Why is vegetative propagation practised for growing some types of
plants?

5.

Why is DNA copying an essential part of the process of reproduction?

?

8.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
We are also familiar with modes of reproduction that depend on the
involvement of two individuals before a new generation can be created.
Bulls alone cannot produce new calves, nor can hens alone produce
new chicks. In such cases, both sexes, males and females, are needed to
produce new generations. What is the significance of this sexual mode
of reproduction? Are there any limitations of the asexual mode of
reproduction, which we have been discussing above?

8.3.1 Why the Sexual Mode of Reproduction?
The creation of two new cells from one involves copying of the DNA as
well as of the cellular apparatus. The DNA copying mechanism, as we
have noted, cannot be absolutely accurate, and the resultant errors are
a source of variations in populations of organisms. Every individual
organism cannot be protected by variations, but in a population,
variations are useful for ensuring the survival of the species. It would
therefore make sense if organisms came up with reproductive modes
that allowed more and more variation to be generated.
While DNA-copying mechanisms are not absolutely accurate, they
are precise enough to make the generation of variation a fairly slow
process. If the DNA copying mechanisms were to be less accurate, many
of the resultant DNA copies would not be able to work with the cellular
apparatus, and would die. So how can the process of making variants
be speeded up? Each new variation is made in a DNA copy that already
has variations accumulated from previous generations. Thus, two
different individuals in a population would have quite different patterns
of accumulated variations. Since all of these variations are in living
individuals, it is assured that they do not have any really bad effects.
Combining variations from two or more individuals would thus create
new combinations of variants. Each combination would be novel, since
it would involve two different individuals. The sexual mode of

133

How do Organisms Reproduce?

2020-21

reproduction incorporates such a process of combining DNA from two
different individuals during reproduction.
But this creates a major difficulty. If each new generation is to be the
combination of the DNA copies from two pre-existing individuals, then
each new generation will end up having twice the amount of DNA that
the previous generation had. This is likely to mess up the control of the
cellular apparatus by the DNA. How many ways can we think of for
solving this difficulty?
We have seen earlier that as organisms become more complex, the
specialisation of tissue increases. One solution that many multi-cellular
organisms have found for the problem mentioned above is to have special
lineages of cells in specialised organs in which only half the number of
chromosomes and half the amount of DNA as compared to the nonreproductive body cells. This is achieved by a process of cell division
called meiosis. Thus, when these germ-cells from two individuals combine
during sexual reproduction to form a new individual, it results in reestablishment of the number of chromosomes and the DNA content in
the new generation.
If the zygote is to grow and develop into an organism which has
highly specialised tissues and organs, then it has to have sufficient stores
of energy for doing this. In very simple organisms, it is seen that the two
germ-cells are not very different from one another, or may even be similar.
But as the body designs become more complex, the germ-cells also
specialise. One germ-cell is large and contains the food-stores while the
other is smaller and likely to be motile. Conventionally, the motile germcell is called the male gamete and the germ-cell containing the stored
food is called the female gamete. We shall see in the next few sections
how the need to create these two different types of gametes give rise to
differences in the male and female reproductive organs and, in some
cases, differences in the bodies of the male and female organisms.

8.3.2 Sexual Reproduction in Flowering Plants

Figure 8.7
Longitudinal section of
flower

The reproductive parts of angiosperms are located in the flower. You
have already studied the different parts of a flower – sepals, petals,
stamens and pistil. Stamens and pistil are
the reproductive parts of a flower which
contain the germ-cells. What possible
functions could the petals and sepals serve?
The flower may be unisexual (papaya,
watermelon) when it contains either stamens
or pistil or bisexual (Hibiscus, mustard)
when it contains both stamens and pistil.
Stamen is the male reproductive part and it
produces pollen grains that are yellowish
in colour. You must have seen this yellowish
powder that often sticks to our hands if we
touch the stamen of a flower. Pistil is present
in the centre of a flower and is the female
reproductive part. It is made of three parts.

Science

134

2020-21

The swollen bottom part is the ovary, middle elongated part is the style
and the terminal part which may be sticky is the stigma. The ovary
contains ovules and each ovule has an egg cell. The male germ-cell
produced by pollen grain fuses with the female gamete present in
the ovule. This fusion of the germ-cells or fertilisation gives us the
zygote which is capable of growing into a new plant.
Thus the pollen needs to be transferred from the stamen to the
stigma. If this transfer of pollen occurs in the same flower, it is
referred to as self-pollination. On the other hand, if the pollen is
transferred from one flower to another, it is known as crosspollination. This transfer of pollen from one flower to another is
achieved by agents like wind, water or animals.
After the pollen lands on a suitable stigma, it has to reach the
female germ-cells which are in the ovary. For this, a tube grows
out of the pollen grain and travels through the style to reach the
ovary.
After fertilisation, the zygote divides several times to form an
embryo within the ovule. The ovule develops a tough coat and is
gradually converted into a seed. The ovary grows rapidly and ripens
to form a fruit. Meanwhile, the petals, sepals, stamens, style and
stigma may shrivel and fall off. Have you ever observed any flower
Figure 8.8
part still persisting in the fruit? Try and work out the advantages
Germination of pollen on
of seed-formation for the plant. The seed contains the future plant
stigma
or embryo which develops into a seedling under appropriate
conditions. This process is known as germination.

Activity 8.7
n
n

n
n

Soak a few seeds of Bengal gram (chana)
and keep them overnight.
Drain the excess water and cover the seeds
with a wet cloth and leave them for a day.
Make sure that the seeds do not become dry.
Cut open the seeds carefully and observe
the different parts.
Compare your observations with the Fig. 8.9
and see if you can identify all the parts.

Figure 8.9
Germination

8.3.3 Reproduction in Human Beings
So far, we have been discussing the variety of modes that different species
use for reproduction. Let us now look at the species that we are most
interested in, namely, humans. Humans use a sexual mode of
reproduction. How does this process work?
Let us begin at an apparently unrelated point. All of us know that
our bodies change as we become older. You have learnt changes that
take place in your body earlier in Class VIII also. We notice that our
height has increased continuously from early age till now. We acquire
teeth, we even lose the old, so-called milk teeth and acquire new ones.

135

How do Organisms Reproduce?

2020-21

All of these are changes that can be grouped under the general process
of growth, in which the body becomes larger. But in early teenage years,
a whole new set of changes occurs that cannot be explained simply as
body enlargement. Instead, the appearance of the body changes.
Proportions change, new features appear, and so do new sensations.
Some of these changes are common to both boys and girls. We begin
to notice thick hair growing in new parts of the body such as armpits
and the genital area between the thighs, which can also become darker
in colour. Thinner hair can also appear on legs and arms, as well as on
the face. The skin frequently becomes oily and we might begin to develop
pimples. We begin to be conscious and aware of both our own bodies
and those of others in new ways.
On the other hand, there are also changes taking place that are
different between boys and girls. In girls, breast size begins to increase,
with darkening of the skin of the nipples at the tips of the breasts. Also,
girls begin to menstruate at around this time. Boys begin to have new
thick hair growth on the face and their voices begin to crack. Further,
the penis occasionally begins to become enlarged and erect, either in
daydreams or at night.
All of these changes take place slowly, over a period of months and
years. They do not happen all at the same time in one person, nor do
they happen at an exact age. In some people, they happen early and
quickly, while in others, they can happen slowly. Also, each change does
not become complete quickly either. So, for example, thick hair on the
face in boys appears as a few scattered hairs first, and only slowly does
the growth begin to become uniform. Even so, all these changes show
differences between people. Just as we have differently shaped noses or
fingers, so also we have different patterns of hair growth, or size and
shape of breast or penis. All of these changes are aspects of the sexual
maturation of the body.
Why does the body show sexual maturation at this age? We have
talked about the need for specialised cell types in multi-cellular bodies
to carry out specialised functions. The creation of germ-cells to participate
in sexual reproduction is another specialised function, and we have seen
that plants develop special cell and tissue types to create them. Human
beings also develop special tissues for this purpose. However, while the
body of the individual organism is growing to its adult size, the resources
of the body are mainly directed at achieving this growth. While that is
happening, the maturation of the reproductive tissue is not likely to be
a major priority. Thus, as the rate of general body growth begins to slow
down, reproductive tissues begin to mature. This period during
adolescence is called puberty.
So how do all the changes that we have talked about link to the
reproductive process? We must remember that the sexual mode of
reproduction means that germ-cells from two individuals have to join
together. This can happen by the external release of germ-cells from the
bodies of individuals, as happens in flowering plants. Or it can happen
by two individuals joining their bodies together for internal transfer of
germ-cells for fusion, as happens in many animals. If animals are to

Science

136

2020-21

participate in this process of mating, their state of sexual maturity must
be identifiable by other individuals. Many changes during puberty, such
as new hair-growth patterns, are signals that sexual maturation is taking
place.
On the other hand, the actual transfer of germ-cells between two
people needs special organs for the sexual act, such as the penis when it
is capable of becoming erect. In mammals such as humans, the baby is
carried in the mother’s body for a long period, and will be breast-fed
later. The female reproductive organs and breasts will need to mature to
accommodate these possibilities. Let us look at the systems involved in
the process of sexual reproduction.

8.3.3 (a) Male Reproductive System
The male reproductive system (Fig. 8.10)
consists of portions which produce the
germ-cells and other portions that deliver
the germ-cells to the site of fertilisation.
The formation of germ-cells or sperms
takes place in the testes. These are located
outside the abdominal cavity in scrotum
because sperm formation requires a lower
temperature than the normal body
temperature. We have discussed the role of the
testes in the secretion of the hormone,
testosterone, in the previous chapter. In
addition to regulating the formation of sperms,
testosterone brings about changes in
appearance seen in boys at the time of puberty.
The sperms formed are delivered
through the vas deferens which unites with
a tube coming from the urinary bladder. The
urethra thus forms a common passage for
both the sperms and urine. Along the path
of the vas deferens, glands like the prostate
and the seminal vesicles add their secretions
so that the sperms are now in a fluid which
makes their transport easier and this fluid
also provides nutrition. The sperms are tiny
bodies that consist of mainly genetic
material and a long tail that helps them to
move towards the female germ-cell.

Figure 8.10 Human –male reproductive system

8.3.3 (b) Female Reproductive System
The female germ-cells or eggs are made in
the ovaries. They are also responsible for the
production of some hormones. Look at
Fig. 8.11 and identify the various organs in
the female reproductive system.

Figure 8.11 Human –female reproductive system

137

How do Organisms Reproduce?

2020-21

When a girl is born, the ovaries already contain thousands of
immature eggs. On reaching puberty, some of these start maturing. One
egg is produced every month by one of the ovaries. The egg is carried
from the ovary to the womb through a thin oviduct or fallopian tube.
The two oviducts unite into an elastic bag-like structure known as the
uterus. The uterus opens into the vagina through the cervix.
The sperms enter through the vaginal passage during sexual
intercourse. They travel upwards and reach the oviduct where they may
encounter the egg. The fertilised egg (zygote) starts dividing and form a
ball of cells or embryo. The embryo is implanted in the lining of the uterus
where they continue to grow and develop organs to become foetus. We
have seen in earlier sections that the mother’s body is designed to
undertake the development of the child. Hence the uterus prepares itself
every month to receive and nurture the growing embryo. The lining
thickens and is richly supplied with blood to nourish the growing embryo.
The embryo gets nutrition from the mother’s blood with the help of a
special tissue called placenta. This is a disc which is embedded in the
uterine wall. It contains villi on the embryo’s side of the tissue. On the
mother’s side are blood spaces, which surround the villi. This provides
a large surface area for glucose and oxygen to pass from the mother to
the embryo. The developing embryo will also generate waste substances
which can be removed by transferring them into the mother’s blood
through the placenta. The development of the child inside the mother’s
body takes approximately nine months. The child is born as a result of
rhythmic contractions of the muscles in the uterus.

8.3.3 (c) What happens when the Egg is not Fertilised?
If the egg is not fertilised, it lives for about one day. Since the ovary
releases one egg every month, the uterus also prepares itself every month
to receive a fertilised egg. Thus its lining becomes thick and spongy.
This would be required for nourishing the embryo if fertilisation had
taken place. Now, however, this lining is not needed any longer. So, the
lining slowly breaks and comes out through the vagina as blood and
mucous. This cycle takes place roughly every month and is known as
menstruation. It usually lasts for about two to eight days.

8.3.3 (d) Reproductive Health
As we have seen, the process of sexual maturation is gradual, and takes
place while general body growth is still going on. Therefore, some degree
of sexual maturation does not necessarily mean that the body or the
mind is ready for sexual acts or for having and bringing up children.
How do we decide if the body or the mind is ready for this major
responsibility? All of us are under many different kinds of pressures
about these issues. There can be pressure from our friends for
participating in many activities, whether we really want to or not. There
can be pressure from families to get married and start having children.
There can be pressure from government agencies to avoid having
children. In this situation, making choices can become very difficult.

Science

138

2020-21

We must also consider the possible health consequences of having
sex. We have discussed in Class IX that diseases can be transmitted
from person to person in a variety of ways. Since the sexual act is a
very intimate connection of bodies, it is not surprising that many
diseases can be sexually transmitted. These include bacterial infections
such as gonorrhoea and syphilis, and viral infections such as warts
and HIV-AIDS. Is it possible to prevent the transmission of such diseases
during the sexual act? Using a covering, called a condom, for the penis
during sex helps to prevent transmission of many of these infections to
some extent.
The sexual act always has the potential to lead to pregnancy.
Pregnancy will make major demands on the body and the mind of the
woman, and if she is not ready for it, her health will be adversely
affected. Therefore, many ways have been devised to avoid pregnancy.
These contraceptive methods fall in a number of categories. One
category is the creation of a mechanical barrier so that sperm does not
reach the egg. Condoms on the penis or similar coverings worn in the
vagina can serve this purpose. Another category of contraceptives acts
by changing the hormonal balance of the body so that eggs are not
released and fertilisation cannot occur. These drugs commonly need
to be taken orally as pills. However, since they change hormonal
balances, they can cause side-effects too. Other contraceptive devices
such as the loop or the copper-T are placed in the uterus to prevent
pregnancy. Again, they can cause side effects due to irritation of the
uterus. If the vas deferens in the male is blocked, sperm transfer will
be prevented. If the fallopian tube in the female is blocked, the egg will
not be able to reach the uterus. In both cases fertilisation will not take
place. Surgical methods can be used to create such blocks. While
surgical methods are safe in the long run, surgery itself can cause
infections and other problems if not performed properly. Surgery can
also be used for removal of unwanted pregnancies. These may be
misused by people who do not want a particular child, as happens in
illegal sex-selective abortion of female foetuses. For a healthy society,
the female-male sex ratio must be maintained. Because of reckless
female foeticides, child sex ratio is declining at an alarming rate in
some sections of our society, although prenatal sex determination has
been prohibited by law.
We have noted earlier that reproduction is the process by which
organisms increase their populations. The rates of birth and death in a
given population will determine its size. The size of the human population
is a cause for concern for many people. This is because an expanding
population makes it harder to improve everybody’s standard of living.
However, if inequality in society is the main reason for poor standards of
living for many people, the size of the population is relatively unimportant.
If we look around us, what can we identify as the most important
reason(s) for poor living standards?
139

How do Organisms Reproduce?

2020-21

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

How is the process of pollination different from fertilisation?

2.

What is the role of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland?

3.

What are the changes seen in girls at the time of puberty?

4.

How does the embryo get nourishment inside the mother’s body?

5.

If a woman is using a copper -T, will it help in protecting her from
sexually transmitted diseases?

?

What you have learnt
n

n

n

n

n

n

n

n
n

n

n

n

n

n

n

Reproduction, unlike other life processes, is not essential to maintain the life of an
individual organism.
Reproduction involves creation of a DNA copy and additional cellular apparatus
by the cell involved in the process.
Various organisms use different modes of reproduction depending on their body
design.
In fission, many bacteria and protozoa simply divide into two or more daughter
cells.
Organisms such as hydra can regenerate if they are broken into pieces. They can
also give out buds which mature into new individuals.
Roots, stems and leaves of some plants develop into new plants through vegetative
propagation.
These are examples of asexual reproduction where new generations are created
from a single individual.
Sexual reproduction involves two individuals for the creation of a new individual.
DNA copying mechanisms creates variations which are useful for ensuring the
survival of the species. Modes of sexual reproduction allow for greater variation to
be generated.
Reproduction in flowering plants involves transfer of pollen grains from the anther
to the stigma which is referred to as pollination. This is followed by fertilisation.
Changes in the body at puberty, such as increase in breast size in girls and new
facial hair growth in boys, are signs of sexual maturation.
The male reproductive system in human beings consists of testes which produce
sperms, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, urethra and penis.
The female reproductive system in human beings consists of ovaries, fallopian
tubes, uterus and vagina.
Sexual reproduction in human beings involves the introduction of sperm in the
vagina of the female. Fertilisation occurs in the fallopian tube.
Contraception to avoid pregnancy can be achieved by the use of condoms, oral
pills, copper-T and other methods.

Science

140

2020-21

E X E R C I S E S
1. Asexual reproduction takes place through budding in
(a) amoeba.
(b) yeast.
(c) plasmodium.
(d) leishmania.
2. Which of the following is not a part of the female reproductive system in human
beings?
(a)
Ovary
(b)
Uterus
(c)
Vas deferens
(d)
Fallopian tube
3. The anther contains
(a)
sepals.
(b)
ovules.
(c)
pistil.
(d)
pollen grains.
4. What are the advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction?
5. What are the functions performed by the testis in human beings?
6. Why does menstruation occur?
7. Draw a labelled diagram of the longitudinal section of a flower.
8. What are the different methods of contraception?
9. How are the modes for reproduction different in unicellular and
multicellular organisms?
10. How does reproduction help in providing stability to populations of species?
11. What could be the reasons for adopting contraceptive methods?

141

How do Organisms Reproduce?

2020-21

