CHAPTER

6

Life Processes

H

ow do we tell the difference between what is alive and what is not
alive? If we see a dog running, or a cow chewing cud, or a man
shouting loudly on the street, we know that these are living beings. What
if the dog or the cow or the man were asleep? We would still think that
they were alive, but how did we know that? We see them breathing, and
we know that they are alive. What about plants? How do we know that
they are alive? We see them green, some of us will say. But what about
plants that have leaves of colours other than green? They grow over
time, so we know that they are alive, some will say. In other words, we
tend to think of some sort of movement, either growth-related or not, as
common evidence for being alive. But a plant that is not visibly growing is
still alive, and some animals can breathe without visible movement. So
using visible movement as the defining characteristic of life is not enough.
Movements over very small scales will be invisible to the naked eye –
movements of molecules, for example. Is this invisible molecular
movement necessary for life? If we ask this question to professional
biologists, they will say yes. In fact, viruses do not show any molecular
movement in them (until they infect some cell), and that is partly why
there is a controversy about whether they are truly alive or not.
Why are molecular movements needed for life? We have seen in earlier
classes that living organisms are well-organised structures; they can
have tissues, tissues have cells, cells have smaller components in them,
and so on. Because of the effects of the environment, this organised,
ordered nature of living structures is very likely to keep breaking down
over time. If order breaks down, the organism will no longer be alive. So
living creatures must keep repairing and maintaining their structures.
Since all these structures are made up of molecules, they must move
molecules around all the time.
What are the maintenance processes in living organisms?
Let us explore.

WHATT ARE LIFE PROCESSES?
6.1 WHA
The maintenance functions of living organisms must go on even when
they are not doing anything particular. Even when we are just sitting in

2020-21

class, even if we are just asleep, this maintenance job has to go on.
The processes which together perform this maintenance job are
life processes.
Since these maintenance processes are needed to prevent damage
and break-down, energy is needed for them. This energy comes from
outside the body of the individual organism. So there must be a process
to transfer a source of energy from outside the body of the organism,
which we call food, to the inside, a process we commonly call nutrition.
If the body size of the organisms is to grow, additional raw material will
also be needed from outside. Since life on earth depends on carbonbased molecules, most of these food sources are also carbon-based.
Depending on the complexity of these carbon sources, different
organisms can then use different kinds of nutritional processes.
The outside sources of energy could be quite varied, since the
environment is not under the control of the individual organism. These
sources of energy, therefore, need to be broken down or built up in the
body, and must be finally converted to a uniform source of energy that
can be used for the various molecular movements needed for
maintaining living structures, as well as to the kind of molecules the
body needs to grow. For this, a series of chemical reactions in the
body are necessary. Oxidising-reducing reactions are some of the most
common chemical means to break-down molecules. For this, many
organisms use oxygen sourced from outside the body. The process
of acquiring oxygen from outside the body, and to use it in the process
of break-down of food sources for cellular needs, is what we call
respiration.
In the case of a single-celled organism, no specific organs for taking
in food, exchange of gases or removal of wastes may be needed because
the entire surface of the organism is in contact with the environment.
But what happens when the body size of the organism increases and
the body design becomes more complex? In multi-cellular organisms,
all the cells may not be in direct contact with the surrounding
environment. Thus, simple diffusion will not meet the requirements of
all the cells.
We have seen previously how, in multi-cellular organisms, various
body parts have specialised in the functions they perform. We are familiar
with the idea of these specialised tissues, and with their organisation in
the body of the organism. It is therefore not surprising that the uptake
of food and of oxygen will also be the function of specialised tissues.
However, this poses a problem, since the food and oxygen are now taken
up at one place in the body of the organisms, while all parts of the body
need them. This situation creates a need for a transportation system for
carrying food and oxygen from one place to another in the body.
When chemical reactions use the carbon source and the oxygen for
energy generation, they create by-products that are not only useless
for the cells of the body, but could even be harmful. These waste byproducts are therefore needed to be removed from the body and discarded
outside by a process called excretion. Again, if the basic rules for body

Science

94

2020-21

design in multi-cellular organisms are followed, a specialised tissue for
excretion will be developed, which means that the transportation system
will need to transport waste away from cells to this excretory tissue.
Let us consider these various processes, so essential to maintain
life, one by one.

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

Why is diffusion insufficient to meet the oxygen requirements of multicellular organisms like humans?

2.

What criteria do we use to decide whether something is alive?

3.

What are outside raw materials used for by an organism?

4.

What processes would you consider essential for maintaining life?

?

6.2 NUTRITION
When we walk or ride a bicycle, we are using up energy. Even when we
are not doing any apparent activity, energy is needed to maintain a
state of order in our body. We also need materials from outside in order
to grow, develop, synthesise protein and other substances needed in
the body. This source of energy and materials is the food we eat.
How do living things get their food?
The general requirement for energy and materials is common in all
organisms, but it is fulfilled in different ways. Some organisms use simple
food material obtained from inorganic sources in the form of carbon
dioxide and water. These organisms, the autotrophs, include green
plants and some bacteria. Other organisms utilise complex substances.
These complex substances have to be broken down into simpler ones
before they can be used for the upkeep and growth of the body. To
achieve this, organisms use bio-catalysts called enzymes. Thus, the
heterotrophs survival depends directly or indirectly on autotrophs.
Heterotrophic organisms include animals and fungi.

6.2.1 Autotrophic Nutrition
Carbon and energy requirements of the autotrophic organism are
fulfilled by photosynthesis. It is the process by which autotrophs take
in substances from the outside and convert them into stored forms of
energy. This material is taken in the form of carbon dioxide and water
which is converted into carbohydrates in the presence of sunlight and
chlorophyll. Carbohydrates are utilised for providing energy to the plant.
We will study how this takes place in the next section. The carbohydrates
which are not used immediately are stored in the form of starch, which
serves as the internal energy reserve to be used as and when required
by the plant. A somewhat similar situation is seen in us where some of
the energy derived from the food we eat is stored in our body in the form
of glycogen.

95

Life Processes

2020-21

Let us now see what actually happens during the process of
photosynthesis. The following events occur during this process –
(i) Absorption of light energy by
chlorophyll.
(ii) Conversion of light energy to chemical
energy and splitting of water molecules
into hydrogen and oxygen.
(iii) Reduction of carbon dioxide to
carbohydrates.
These steps need not take place one after
the other immediately. For example, desert
plants take up carbon dioxide at night and
prepare an intermediate which is acted upon
by the energy absorbed by the chlorophyll
during the day.
Let us see how each of the components of
the above reaction are necessary for
photosynthesis.
If you carefully observe a cross-section of a
leaf under the microscope (shown in Fig. 6.1),
you will notice that some cells contain green
dots. These green dots are cell organelles called
chloroplasts which contain chlorophyll. Let us
do an activity which demonstrates that
chlorophyll is essential for photosynthesis.

Figure 6.1
Cross-section of a leaf

Activity 6.1
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n

Figure 6.2
Variegated leaf (a) before
and (b) after starch test

n

Take a potted plant with variegated leaves – for example, money plant
or crotons.
Keep the plant in a dark room for three days so that all the starch
gets used up.
Now keep the plant in sunlight for about six hours.
Pluck a leaf from the plant. Mark the green areas in it and trace them
on a sheet of paper.
Dip the leaf in boiling water for a few minutes.
After this, immerse it in a beaker containing alcohol.
Carefully place the above beaker in a water-bath and heat till the
alcohol begins to boil.
What happens to the colour of the leaf? What is the colour of the
solution?
Now dip the leaf in a dilute solution of iodine for a few minutes.
Take out the leaf and rinse off the iodine solution.
Observe the colour of the leaf and compare this with the tracing of
the leaf done in the beginning (Fig. 6.2).
What can you conclude about the presence of starch in various areas
of the leaf?

Science

96

2020-21

Now, let us study how the plant
obtains carbon dioxide. In Class IX,
we had talked about stomata (Fig. 6.3)
which are tiny pores present on the
surface of the leaves. Massive amounts
of gaseous exchange takes place in the
leaves through these pores for the
purpose of photosynthesis. But it is
important to note here that exchange
of gases occurs across the surface of
stems, roots and leaves as well. Since
large amounts of water can also be lost
through these stomata, the plant
Figure 6.3 (a) Open and (b) closed stomatal pore
closes these pores when it does not
need carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. The opening and closing of the
pore is a function of the guard cells. The guard cells swell when water
flows into them, causing the stomatal pore to open. Similarly the pore
closes if the guard cells shrink.

Activity 6.2
n
n
n

n
n

n
n
n
n

Take two healthy potted plants
which are nearly the same size.
Keep them in a dark room for
three days.
Now place each plant on
separate glass plates. Place a
watch-glass containing potassium
hydroxide by the side of one of
the plants. The potassium
hydroxide is used to absorb
carbon dioxide.
Cover both plants with separate
(b)
(a)
bell-jars as shown in Fig. 6.4.
Use vaseline to seal the bottom
Figure 6.4 Experimental set-up (a) with potassium
of the jars to the glass plates so
hydroxide (b) without potassium hydroxide
that the set-up is air-tight.
Keep the plants in sunlight for
about two hours.
Pluck a leaf from each plant and check for the presence of starch as in the above activity.
Do both the leaves show the presence of the same amount of starch?
What can you conclude from this activity?

Based on the two activities performed above, can we design an
experiment to demonstrate that sunlight is essential for photosynthesis?
So far, we have talked about how autotrophs meet their energy
requirements. But they also need other raw materials for building their
body. Water used in photosynthesis is taken up from the soil by the
roots in terrestrial plants. Other materials like nitrogen, phosphorus,
iron and magnesium are taken up from the soil. Nitrogen is an essential
element used in the synthesis of proteins and other compounds. This is

97

Life Processes

2020-21

taken up in the form of inorganic nitrates or nitrites. Or it is taken up as
organic compounds which have been prepared by bacteria from
atmospheric nitrogen.

6.2.2 Heterotrophic Nutrition
Each organism is adapted to its environment. The form of nutrition
differs depending on the type and availability of food material as well
as how it is obtained by the organism. For example, whether the food
source is stationary (such as grass) or mobile (such as a deer), would
allow for differences in how the food is accessed and what is the nutritive
apparatus used by a cow and a lion. There is a range of strategies by
which the food is taken in and used by the organism. Some organisms
break-down the food material outside the body and then absorb it.
Examples are fungi like bread moulds, yeast and mushrooms. Others
take in whole material and break it down inside their bodies. What can
be taken in and broken down depends on the body design and
functioning. Some other organisms derive nutrition from plants or
animals without killing them. This parasitic nutritive strategy is used
by a wide variety of organisms like cuscuta (amar-bel), ticks, lice,
leeches and tape-worms.

6.2.3 How do Organisms obtain their Nutrition?
Since the food and the way it is obtained differ, the digestive system is
different in various organisms. In single-celled organisms, the food
may be taken in by the entire surface. But as the complexity of the
organism increases, different parts become specialised to perform
different functions. For example, Amoeba takes in food using
temporary finger-like extensions of the cell surface which fuse over
the food particle forming a food-vacuole (Fig. 6.5). Inside the foodvacuole, complex substances are broken down into simpler ones
which then diffuse into the cytoplasm. The remaining undigested
material is moved to the surface of the cell and thrown out. In
Paramoecium, which is also a unicellular organism, the cell has a
definite shape and food is taken in at a specific spot. Food is moved
to this spot by the movement of cilia which cover the entire surface
of the cell.
Figure 6.5
Nutrition in Amoeba

6.2.4 Nutrition in Human Beings
The alimentary canal is basically a long tube extending from the mouth
to the anus. In Fig. 6.6, we can see that the tube has different parts.
Various regions are specialised to perform different functions. What
happens to the food once it enters our body? We shall discuss this
process here.

Science

98

2020-21

Activity 6.3
n
n
n
n
n
n

Take 1 mL starch solution (1%) in two test tubes (A and B).
Add 1 mL saliva to test tube A and leave both test tubes undisturbed
for 20-30 minutes.
Now add a few drops of dilute iodine solution to the test tubes.
In which test tube do you observe a colour change?
What does this indicate about the presence or absence of starch
in the two test tubes?
What does this tell us about the action of saliva on starch?

We eat various types of food which has to pass through the same
digestive tract. Naturally the food has to be processed to generate
particles which are small and of the same texture. This is achieved by
crushing the food with our teeth. Since the lining of the canal is soft, the
food is also wetted to make its passage smooth. When we eat something
we like, our mouth ‘waters’. This is actually not only water, but a fluid
called saliva secreted by the salivary glands. Another aspect of the food
we ingest is its complex nature. If it is to be absorbed from the alimentary
canal, it has to be broken into smaller molecules. This is done with the
help of biological catalysts called
enzymes. The saliva contains an
enzyme called salivary amylase that
breaks down starch which is a complex
molecule to give simple sugar. The food
is mixed thoroughly with saliva and
moved around the mouth while
chewing by the muscular tongue.
It is necessary to move the food in
a regulated manner along the digestive
tube so that it can be processed
properly in each part. The lining of
canal has muscles that contract
rhythmically in order to push the food
forward. These peristaltic movements
occur all along the gut.
From the mouth, the food is taken
to the stomach through the food-pipe
or oesophagus. The stomach is a large
organ which expands when food
enters it. The muscular walls of the
stomach help in mixing the food
Figure 6.6 Human alimentary canal
thoroughly with more digestive juices.
The digestion in stomach is taken
care of by the gastric glands present in the wall of the stomach. These
release hydrochloric acid, a protein digesting enzyme called pepsin,
and mucus. The hydrochloric acid creates an acidic medium which
facilitates the action of the enzyme pepsin. What other function do you
think is served by the acid? The mucus protects the inner lining of the
stomach from the action of the acid under normal conditions. We

99

Life Processes

2020-21

More to Know!

have often heard adults complaining about ‘acidity’. Can this be related
to what has been discussed above?
The exit of food from the stomach is regulated by a sphincter muscle
which releases it in small amounts into the small intestine. From the
stomach, the food now enters the small intestine. This is the longest part
of the alimentary canal which is fitted into a compact space because of
extensive coiling. The length of the small intestine differs in various
animals depending on the food they eat. Herbivores eating grass need a
longer small intestine to allow the cellulose to be digested. Meat is easier
to digest, hence carnivores like tigers have a shorter small intestine.
The small intestine is the site of the complete digestion of
carbohydrates, proteins and fats. It receives the secretions of the liver
and pancreas for this purpose. The food coming from the stomach is
acidic and has to be made alkaline for the pancreatic enzymes to act.
Bile juice from the liver accomplishes this in addition to acting on fats.
Fats are present in the intestine in the form of large globules which makes
it difficult for enzymes to act on them. Bile salts break them down into
smaller globules increasing the efficiency of enzyme action. This is similar
to the emulsifying action of soaps on dirt that we have learnt about in
Chapter 4. The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice which contains
enzymes like trypsin for digesting proteins and lipase for breaking down
emulsified fats. The walls of the small intestine contain glands which
secrete intestinal juice. The enzymes present in it finally convert the
proteins to amino acids, complex carbohydrates into glucose and fats
into fatty acids and glycerol.
Digested food is taken up by the walls of the intestine. The inner
lining of the small intestine has numerous finger-like projections called
villi which increase the surface area for absorption. The villi are richly
supplied with blood vessels which take the absorbed food to each and
every cell of the body, where it is utilised for obtaining energy, building
up new tissues and the repair of old tissues.
The unabsorbed food is sent into the large intestine where its wall
absorb more water from this material. The rest of the material is removed
from the body via the anus. The exit of this waste material is regulated
by the anal sphincter.

Dental caries
Dental caries or tooth decay causes gradual softening of enamel and dentine. It begins
when bacteria acting on sugars produce acids that softens or demineralises the enamel.
Masses of bacterial cells together with food particles stick to the teeth to form dental
plaque. Saliva cannot reach the tooth surface to neutralise the acid as plaque covers
the teeth. Brushing the teeth after eating removes the plaque before the bacteria
produce acids. If untreated, microorganisms may invade the pulp, causing
inflammation and infection.

Science

100

2020-21

Q
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

What are the differences between autotrophic nutrition and heterotrophic
nutrition?
Where do plants get each of the raw materials required for photosynthesis?
What is the role of the acid in our stomach?
What is the function of digestive enzymes?
How is the small intestine designed to absorb digested food?

?

ATION
6.3 RESPIR
RESPIRA
Pichkari

Activity 6.4
n
n
n
n

n
n

Take some freshly prepared lime
water in a test tube.
Blow air through this lime water.
Note how long it takes for the lime
water to turn milky.
Use a syringe or pichkari to pass air
through some fresh lime water
taken in another test tube (Fig. 6.7).
Note how long it takes for this lime
water to turn milky.
What does this tell us about the
amount of carbon dioxide in the air
that we breathe out?

Tube

Rubber
tube

Test tube containing
lime water

Lime
water

(a)

(b)

Figure 6.7
(a) Air being passed into lime water with a pichkari/
syringe, (b) air being exhaled into lime water

Activity 6.5
n
n
n
n

Take some fruit juice or sugar solution and add some yeast to
this. Take this mixture in a test tube fitted with a one-holed cork.
Fit the cork with a bent glass tube. Dip the free end of the glass
tube into a test tube containing freshly prepared lime water.
What change is observed in the lime water and how long does it
take for this change to occur?
What does this tell us about the products of fermentation?

We have discussed nutrition in organisms in the last section. The
food material taken in during the process of nutrition is used in cells to
provide energy for various life processes. Diverse organisms do this in
different ways – some use oxygen to break-down glucose completely
into carbon dioxide and water, some use other pathways that do not
involve oxygen (Fig. 6.8). In all cases, the first step is the break-down of
glucose, a six-carbon molecule, into a three-carbon molecule called
pyruvate. This process takes place in the cytoplasm. Further, the
pyruvate may be converted into ethanol and carbon dioxide. This process
takes place in yeast during fermentation. Since this process takes place
in the absence of air (oxygen), it is called anaerobic respiration. Breakdown of pyruvate using oxygen takes place in the mitochondria. This

101

Life Processes

2020-21

process breaks up the three-carbon pyruvate molecule to give three
molecules of carbon dioxide. The other product is water. Since this
process takes place in the presence of air (oxygen), it is called aerobic
respiration. The release of energy in this aerobic process is a lot greater
than in the anaerobic process. Sometimes, when there is a lack of oxygen
in our muscle cells, another pathway for the break-down of pyruvate is
taken. Here the pyruvate is converted into lactic acid which is also a
three-carbon molecule. This build-up of lactic acid in our muscles during
sudden activity causes cramps.

Figure 6.8 Break-down of glucose by various pathways

More to Know!

The energy released during cellular respiration is immediately used
to synthesise a molecule called ATP which is used to fuel all other
activities in the cell. In these processes, ATP is broken down giving rise
to a fixed amount of energy which can drive the endothermic reactions
taking place in the cell.

ATP
ATP is the energy currency for most cellular processes. The energy released during
the process of respiration is used to make an ATP molecule from ADP and inorganic
phosphate.

Endothermic processes in the cell then use this ATP to drive the reactions. When the
terminal phosphate linkage in ATP is broken using water, the energy equivalent to
30.5 kJ/mol is released.
Think of how a battery can provide energy for many different kinds of uses. It can be
used to obtain mechanical energy, light energy, electrical energy and so on. Similarly,
ATP can be used in the cells for the contraction of muscles, protein synthesis,
conduction of nervous impulses and many other activities.
Since the aerobic respiration pathway depends on oxygen, aerobic
organisms need to ensure that there is sufficient intake of oxygen. We
have seen that plants exchange gases through stomata, and the large
inter-cellular spaces ensure that all cells are in contact with air. Carbon
dioxide and oxygen are exchanged by diffusion here. They can go into

Science

102

2020-21

cells, or away from them and out into the air. The direction of diffusion
depends upon the environmental conditions and the requirements of
the plant. At night, when there is no photosynthesis occurring, CO2
elimination is the major exchange activity going on. During the day,
CO2 generated during respiration is used up for photosynthesis, hence
there is no CO2 release. Instead, oxygen release is the major event at
this time.
Animals have evolved different organs for the uptake of oxygen
from the environment and for getting rid of the carbon dioxide
produced. Terrestrial animals can breathe the oxygen in the
atmosphere, but animals that live in water need to use the oxygen
dissolved in water.

Activity 6.6
n

Observe fish in an aquarium. They open and close their mouths
and the gill-slits (or the operculum which covers the gill-slits)
behind their eyes also open and close. Are the timings of the
opening and closing of the mouth and gill-slits coordinated in some
manner?

n

Count the number of times the fish opens and closes its mouth in
a minute.

n

Compare this to the number of times you breathe in and out in a
minute.

Since the amount of dissolved oxygen is fairly low compared
to the amount of oxygen in the air, the rate of breathing in aquatic
organisms is much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms.
Fishes take in water through their mouths and force it past the
gills where the dissolved oxygen is taken up by blood.
Terrestrial organisms use the oxygen in the atmosphere for
respiration. This oxygen is absorbed by different organs in
different animals. All these organs have a structure that increases
the surface area which is in contact with the oxygen-rich
atmosphere. Since the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
has to take place across this surface, this surface is very fine
and delicate. In order to protect this surface, it is usually placed
within the body, so there have to be passages that will take air
to this area. In addition, there is a mechanism for moving the air
in and out of this area where the oxygen is absorbed.
In human beings (Fig. 6.9), air is taken into the body through
the nostrils. The air passing through the nostrils is filtered by
fine hairs that line the passage. The passage is also lined with
mucus which helps in this process. From here, the air passes
through the throat and into the lungs. Rings of cartilage are
present in the throat. These ensure that the air-passage does
not collapse.

More to Know!
Using tobacco directly or
any product of tobacco in
the form of cigar, cigarettes,
bidis, hookah, gutkha, etc.,
is harmful. Use of tobacco
most commonly affects the
tongue, lungs, heart and
liver. Smokeless tobacco is
also a major risk factor for
heart attacks, strokes,
pulmonary diseases and
several forms of cancers.
There is a high incidence of
oral cancer in India due to
the chewing of tobacco in
the form of gutkha. Stay
healthy; just say NO to
tobacco and its products!

103

Life Processes

2020-21

Figure 6.9 Human respiratory system

Do You Know?
Smoking is injurious to
health.
Lung cancer is one of
common causes of
deaths in the world. The
upper part of respiratory
tract is provided with
small
hair -like
structures called cilia.
These cilia help to
remove germs, dust and
other harmful particles
from
inhaled
air.
Smoking destroys these
hair due to which germs,
dust, smoke and other
harmful chemicals enter
lungs
and
cause
infection, cough and
even lung cancer.

Within the lungs, the passage divides into smaller and smaller
tubes which finally terminate in balloon-like structures which
are called alveoli (singular–alveolus). The alveoli provide a surface
where the exchange of gases can take place. The walls of the alveoli
contain an extensive network of blood-vessels. As we have seen
in earlier years, when we breathe in, we lift our ribs and flatten
our diaphragm, and the chest cavity becomes larger as a result.
Because of this, air is sucked into the lungs and fills the expanded
alveoli. The blood brings carbon dioxide from the rest of the body
for release into the alveoli, and the oxygen in the alveolar air is
taken up by blood in the alveolar blood vessels to be transported
to all the cells in the body. During the breathing cycle, when air is
taken in and let out, the lungs always contain a residual volume
of air so that there is sufficient time for oxygen to be absorbed
and for the carbon dioxide to be released.
When the body size of animals is large, the diffusion pressure
alone cannot take care of oxygen delivery to all parts of the body.
Instead, respiratory pigments take up oxygen from the air in the
lungs and carry it to tissues which are deficient in oxygen before
releasing it. In human beings, the respiratory pigment is
haemoglobin which has a very high affinity for oxygen. This pigment
is present in the red blood corpuscles. Carbon dioxide is more
soluble in water than oxygen is and hence is mostly transported in
the dissolved form in our blood.

Science

104

2020-21

Do You Know?

n

n

If the alveolar surface were spread out, it would cover about 80 m2. How much
do you think the surface area of your body is? Consider how efficient exchange
of gases becomes because of the large surface available for the exchange to take
place.
If diffusion were to move oxygen in our body, it is estimated that it would take 3
years for a molecule of oxygen to get to our toes from our lungs. Aren’t you glad
that we have haemoglobin?

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

What advantage over an aquatic organism does a terrestrial organism
have with regard to obtaining oxygen for respiration?

2.

What are the different ways in which glucose is oxidised to provide
energy in various organisms?

3.

How is oxygen and carbon dioxide transported in human beings?

4.

How are the lungs designed in human beings to maximise the area for
exchange of gases?

?

6.4 TR ANSPORT
ANSPORTA
ATION
6.4.1 Transportation in Human Beings
Activity 6.7
n
n
n
n

n
n
n

Visit a health centre in your locality and find out what is the
normal range of haemoglobin content in human beings.
Is it the same for children and adults?
Is there any difference in the haemoglobin levels for men and
women?
Visit a veterinary clinic in your locality. Find out what is the normal
range of haemoglobin content in an animal like the buffalo
or cow.
Is this content different in calves, male and female animals?
Compare the difference seen in male and female human beings
and animals.
How would the difference, if any, be explained?

We have seen in previous sections that blood transports food, oxygen
and waste materials in our bodies. In Class IX, we learnt about blood
being a fluid connective tissue. Blood consists of a fluid medium called
plasma in which the cells are suspended. Plasma transports food, carbon
dioxide and nitrogenous wastes in dissolved form. Oxygen is carried by
the red blood corpuscles. Many other substances like salts, are also
transported by the blood. We thus need a pumping organ to push blood
around the body, a network of tubes to reach all the tissues and a system
in place to ensure that this network can be repaired if damaged.

105

Life Processes

2020-21

Figure 6.10
Schematic sectional
view of the human heart

Our pump — the heart
The heart is a muscular organ which is
as big as our fist (Fig. 6.10). Because
both oxygen and carbon dioxide have to
be transported by the blood, the heart
has different chambers to prevent the
oxygen-rich blood from mixing with the
blood containing carbon dioxide. The
carbon dioxide-rich blood has to reach
the lungs for the carbon dioxide to be
removed, and the oxygenated blood from
the lungs has to be brought back to the
heart. This oxygen-rich blood is then
pumped to the rest of the body.
We can follow this process step by
step (Fig. 6.11). Oxygen-rich blood from
the lungs comes to the thin-walled upper
chamber of the heart on the left, the left atrium. The left atrium relaxes
when it is collecting this blood. It then contracts, while the next chamber,
the left ventricle, relaxes, so that the blood is transferred to it. When the
muscular left ventricle contracts in its turn, the blood is pumped out to
the body. De-oxygenated blood comes from the body to the upper
chamber on the right, the right atrium, as it relaxes. As the right atrium
contracts, the corresponding lower chamber, the right ventricle, dilates.
This transfers blood to the right ventricle, which in turn pumps it to the
lungs for oxygenation. Since ventricles have to pump blood into various
organs, they have thicker muscular walls than the atria do. Valves ensure
that blood does not flow backwards when the atria or ventricles contract.

Oxygen enters the blood in the lungs
The separation of the right side and the left side of
the heart is useful to keep oxygenated and deoxygenated blood from mixing. Such separation
allows a highly efficient supply of oxygen to the
body. This is useful in animals that have high
energy needs, such as birds and mammals, which
constantly use energy to maintain their body
temperature. In animals that do not use energy
for this purpose, the body temperature depends
on the temperature in the environment. Such
animals, like amphibians or many reptiles have
three-chambered hearts, and tolerate some mixing
of the oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood
streams. Fishes, on the other hand, have only two
chambers to their hearts, and the blood is pumped
Figure 6.11
to the gills, is oxygenated there, and passes directly
Schematic representation of transport and exchange
to the rest of the body. Thus, blood goes only once
of oxygen and carbon dioxide
through the heart in the fish during one cycle of
passage through the body. On the other hand, it goes through the heart
twice during each cycle in other vertebrates. This is known as double
circulation.
Science

106

2020-21

More to Know!

Blood pressure
The force that blood exerts against the wall of a vessel is called blood pressure. This
pressure is much greater in arteries than in veins. The pressure of blood inside the
artery during ventricular systole (contraction) is called systolic pressure and pressure
in artery during ventricular diastole (relaxation) is called diastolic pressure. The normal
systolic pressure is about 120 mm of Hg and diastolic pressure is 80 mm of Hg.

Blood pressure is measured with an instrument called sphygmomanometer. High
blood pressure is also called hypertension and is caused by the constriction of
arterioles, which results in increased resistance to blood flow. It can lead to the rupture
of an artery and internal bleeding.

The tubes – blood vessels
Arteries are the vessels which carry blood away from the heart to various
organs of the body. Since the blood emerges from the heart under high
pressure, the arteries have thick, elastic walls. Veins collect the blood
from different organs and bring it back to the heart. They do not need
thick walls because the blood is no longer under pressure, instead they
have valves that ensure that the blood flows only in one direction.
On reaching an organ or tissue, the artery divides into smaller and
smaller vessels to bring the blood in contact with all the individual cells.
The smallest vessels have walls which are one-cell thick and are called
capillaries. Exchange of material between the blood and surrounding
cells takes place across this thin wall. The capillaries then join together
to form veins that convey the blood away from the organ or tissue.
Maintenance by platelets
What happens if this system of tubes develops a leak? Think about
situations when we are injured and start bleeding. Naturally the loss of
blood from the system has to be minimised. In addition, leakage would
lead to a loss of pressure which would reduce the efficiency of the

107

Life Processes

2020-21

pumping system. To avoid this, the blood has platelet cells which circulate
around the body and plug these leaks by helping to clot the blood at
these points of injury.
Lymph
There is another type of fluid also involved in transportation. This is
called lymph or tissue fluid. Through the pores present in the walls of
capillaries some amount of plasma, proteins and blood cells escape into
intercellular spaces in the tissues to form the tissue fluid or lymph. It is
similar to the plasma of blood but colourless and contains less protein.
Lymph drains into lymphatic capillaries from the intercellular spaces,
which join to form large lymph vessels that finally open into larger veins.
Lymph carries digested and absorbed fat from intestine and drains excess
fluid from extra cellular space back into the blood.

6.4.2 Transportation in Plants
We have discussed earlier how plants take in simple compounds such
as CO2 and photosynthesise energy stored in their chlorophyll-containing
organs, namely leaves. The other kinds of raw materials needed for
building plant bodies will also have to be taken up separately. For plants,
the soil is the nearest and richest source of raw materials like nitrogen,
phosphorus and other minerals. The absorption of these substances
therefore occurs through the part in contact with the soil, namely roots.
If the distances between soil-contacting organs and chlorophyllcontaining organs are small, energy and raw materials can easily diffuse
to all parts of the plant body. But if these distances become large because
of changes in plant body design, diffusion processes will not be sufficient
to provide raw material in leaves and energy in roots. A proper system of
transportation is therefore essential in such situations.
Energy needs differ between different body designs. Plants do not
move, and plant bodies have a large proportion of dead cells in many
tissues. As a result, plants have low energy needs, and can use relatively
slow transport systems. The distances over which transport systems
have to operate, however, can be very large in plants such as very tall
trees.
Plant transport systems will move energy stores from leaves and raw
materials from roots. These two pathways are constructed as
independently organised conducting tubes. One, the xylem moves water
and minerals obtained from the soil. The other, phloem transports
products of photosynthesis from the leaves where they are synthesised
to other parts of the plant. We have studied the structure of these tissues
in detail in Class IX.
Transport of water
In xylem tissue, vessels and tracheids of the roots, stems and leaves are
interconnected to form a continuous system of water-conducting
channels reaching all parts of the plant. At the roots, cells in contact
with the soil actively take up ions. This creates a difference in the
concentration of these ions between the root and the soil. Water, therefore,

Science

108

2020-21

moves into the root from the soil to eliminate this difference. This means
that there is steady movement of water into root xylem, creating a column
of water that is steadily pushed upwards.
However, this pressure by itself is unlikely to be enough to move
water over the heights that we commonly see in plants. Plants use another
strategy to move water in the xylem upwards to the highest points of the
plant body.

Activity 6.8
n

n
n
n

Take two small pots of approximately the same size and having
the same amount of soil. One should have a plant in it. Place a
stick of the same height as the plant in the other pot.
Cover the soil in both pots with a plastic sheet so that moisture
cannot escape by evaporation.
Cover both sets, one with the plant and the other with the stick,
with plastic sheets and place in bright sunlight for half an hour.
Do you observe any difference in the two cases?

Provided that the plant has an adequate
supply of water, the water which is lost through the
stomata is replaced by water from the xylem vessels
in the leaf. In fact, evaporation of water molecules from
the cells of a leaf creates a suction which pulls water
from the xylem cells of roots. The loss of water in the
form of vapour from the aerial parts of the plant is
known as transpiration.
Thus, transpiration helps in the absorption and
upward movement of water and minerals dissolved
in it from roots to the leaves. It also helps in
temperature regulation. The effect of root pressure in
transport of water is more important at night. During
the day when the stomata are open, the transpiration
pull becomes the major driving force in the movement Figure 6.12
of water in the xylem.
Movement of water during transpiration in a tree
Transport of food and other substances
So far we have discussed the transport of water and minerals in plants.
Now let us consider how the products of metabolic processes, particularly
photosynthesis, are moved from leaves, where they are formed, to other
parts of the plant. This transport of soluble products of photosynthesis
is called translocation and it occurs in the part of the vascular tissue
known as phloem. Besides the products of photosynthesis, the phloem
transports amino acids and other substances. These substances are
especially delivered to the storage organs of roots, fruits and seeds and
to growing organs. The translocation of food and other substances takes
place in the sieve tubes with the help of adjacent companion cells both
in upward and downward directions.
Unlike transport in xylem which can be largely explained by simple
physical forces, the translocation in phloem is achieved by utilising

109

Life Processes

2020-21

energy. Material like sucrose is transferred into phloem tissue using
energy from ATP. This increases the osmotic pressure of the tissue
causing water to move into it. This pressure moves the material in the
phloem to tissues which have less pressure. This allows the phloem to
move material according to the plant’s needs. For example, in the spring,
sugar stored in root or stem tissue would be transported to the buds
which need energy to grow.

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

What are the components of the transport system in human beings?
What are the functions of these components?

2.

Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in
mammals and birds?

3.

What are the components of the transport system in highly organised
plants?

4.

How are water and minerals transported in plants?

5.

How is food transported in plants?

?

CRETION
6.5 EX
EXCRETION
We have already discussed how organisms get rid of gaseous wastes
generated during photosynthesis or respiration. Other metabolic activities
generate nitrogenous materials which need to be removed. The biological
process involved in the removal of these harmful metabolic wastes from
the body is called excretion. Different organisms use varied strategies to
do this. Many unicellular organisms remove these wastes by simple
diffusion from the body surface into the surrounding
water. As we have seen in other processes, complex
multi-cellular organisms use specialised organs to
perform the same function.

6.5.1 Excretion in Human Beings

Figure 6.13
Excretory system in human beings

The excretory system of human beings (Fig. 6.13)
includes a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a urinary
bladder and a urethra. Kidneys are located in the
abdomen, one on either side of the backbone. Urine
produced in the kidneys passes through the ureters
into the urinary bladder where it is stored until it is
released through the urethra.
How is urine produced? The purpose of making
urine is to filter out waste products from the blood.
Just as CO2 is removed from the blood in the lungs,
nitrogenous waste such as urea or uric acid are
removed from blood in the kidneys. It is then no
surprise that the basic filtration unit in the kidneys,

Science

110

2020-21

More to Know!

like in the lungs, is a cluster of very thin-walled blood
capillaries. Each capillary cluster in the kidney is
associated with the cup-shaped end of a coiled tube
called Bowman’s capsule that collects the filtrate
(Fig. 6.14). Each kidney has large numbers of these
filtration units called nephrons packed close together.
Some substances in the initial filtrate, such as glucose,
amino acids, salts and a major amount of water, are
selectively re-absorbed as the urine flows along the tube.
The amount of water re-absorbed depends on how much
excess water there is in the body, and on how much of
dissolved waste there is to be excreted. The urine forming
in each kidney eventually enters a long tube, the ureter,
which connects the kidneys with the urinary bladder.
Urine is stored in the urinary bladder until the pressure
of the expanded bladder leads to the urge to pass it out
through the urethra. The bladder is muscular, so it is
under nervous control, as we have discussed elsewhere.
As a result, we can usually control the urge to urinate.

Figure 6.14
Structure of a nephron

Artificial kidney (Hemodialysis)
Kidneys are vital organs for survival. Several factors like infections, injury or restricted
blood flow to kidneys reduce the activity of kidneys. This leads to accumulation of
poisonous wastes in the body, which can even lead to death. In case of kidney
failure, an artificial kidney can be used. An artificial kidney is a device to remove
nitrogenous waste products from the blood through dialysis.
Artificial kidneys contain a number of tubes with a semi-permeable lining, suspended
in a tank filled with dialysing fluid.
This fluid has the same osmotic
pressure as blood, except that it is
devoid of nitrogenous wastes. The
patient’s blood is passed through
these tubes. During this passage,
the waste products from the blood
pass into dialysing fluid by diffusion.
The purified blood is pumped back
into the patient. This is similar to the
function of the kidney, but it is
different since there is no reabsorption involved. Normally, in a
healthy adult, the initial filtrate in the
kidneys is about 180 L daily.
However, the volume actually
excreted is only a litre or two a day,
because the remaining filtrate is reabsorbed in the kidney tubules.

111

Life Processes

2020-21

6.5.2 Excretion in Plants

Think it over!

Plants use completely different
strategies for excretion than those
of animals. Oxygen itself can be
thought of as a waste product
generated during photosynthesis!
We have discussed earlier how
plants deal with oxygen as well as
CO2. They can get rid of excess water
by transpiration. For other wastes,
plants use the fact that many of
their tissues consist of dead cells,
and that they can even lose some
parts such as leaves. Many plant
waste products are stored in
cellular vacuoles. Waste products
may be stored in leaves that fall off.
Other waste products are stored as
resins and gums, especially in old
xylem. Plants also excrete some
waste substances into the soil
around them.

Organ donation
Organ donation is a generous act of donating an
organ to a person who suffers from non-function of
organ(s). Donation of an organ may be done by the
consent of the donor and his/her family. Anyone
regardless of age or gender can become an organ
and tissue donor. Organ transplants can save or
transform the life of a person. Transplantation is
required because recipient’s organ has been
damaged or has failed by disease or injury. In organ
transplantation the organ is surgically removed
from one person (organ donor) and transplanted to
another person (the recipient). Common
transplantations include corneas, kidneys, heart,
liver, pancreas, lungs, intestines and bone marrow.
Most organ and tissue donations occur just after
the donor has died or when the doctor declares a
person brain dead. But some organs such as
kidney, part of a liver, lung, etc., and tissues can be
donated while the donor is alive.

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

Describe the structure and functioning of nephrons.

2.

What are the methods used by plants to get rid of excretory products?

3.

How is the amount of urine produced regulated?

?

What you have learnt
n
n

n

n

n

Movement of various types can be taken as an indication of life.
Maintenance of life requires processes like nutrition, respiration, transport of
materials within the body and excretion of waste products.
Autotrophic nutrition involves the intake of simple inorganic materials from the
environment and using an external energy source like the Sun to synthesise complex
high-energy organic material.
Heterotrophic nutrition involves the intake of complex material prepared by other
organisms.
In human beings, the food eaten is broken down by various steps along the
alimentary canal and the digested food is absorbed in the small intestine to be sent
to all cells in the body.

Science

112

2020-21

n

n

n

n

n

n

During the process of respiration, organic compounds such as glucose are broken
down to provide energy in the form of ATP. ATP is used to provide energy for other
reactions in the cell.
Respiration may be aerobic or anaerobic. Aerobic respiration makes more energy
available to the organism.
In human beings, the transport of materials such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, food
and excretory products is a function of the circulatory system. The circulatory
system consists of the heart, blood and blood vessels.
In highly differentiated plants, transport of water, minerals, food and other materials
is a function of the vascular tissue which consists of xylem and phloem.
In human beings, excretory products in the form of soluble nitrogen compounds
are removed by the nephrons in the kidneys.
Plants use a variety of techniques to get rid of waste material. For example, waste
material may be stored in the cell-vacuoles or as gum and resin, removed in the
falling leaves, or excreted into the surrounding soil.

E X E R C I S E S
1. The kidneys in human beings are a part of the system for
(a)
nutrition.
(c)
excretion.
(b)
respiration.
(d)
transportation.
2. The xylem in plants are responsible for
(a)
transport of water.
(c)
transport of amino acids.
(b)
transport of food.
(d)
transport of oxygen.
3. The autotrophic mode of nutrition requires
(a)
carbon dioxide and water.
(c)
sunlight.
(b)
chlorophyll.
(d)
all of the above.
4. The breakdown of pyruvate to give carbon dioxide, water and energy takes place in
(a)
cytoplasm.
(c)
chloroplast.
(b)
mitochondria.
(d)
nucleus.
5. How are fats digested in our bodies? Where does this process take place?
6. What is the role of saliva in the digestion of food?
7. What are the necessary conditions for autotrophic nutrition and what are its byproducts?
8. What are the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration? Name some
organisms that use the anaerobic mode of respiration.
9. How are the alveoli designed to maximise the exchange of gases?
10. What would be the consequences of a deficiency of haemoglobin in our bodies?
11. Describe double circulation of blood in human beings. Why is it necessary?
12. What are the differences between the transport of materials in xylem and phloem?
13. Compare the functioning of alveoli in the lungs and nephrons in the kidneys with
respect to their structure and functioning.

113

Life Processes

2020-21

