CHAPTER

16

Sustainable
Management of
Natural Resources
‘Living in harmony with nature’ is not new to us. Sustainable living has
always been an integral part of India’s tradition and culture. It has been
integrated with our long-lasting traditions and practices, customs, art
and crafts, festivals, food, beliefs, rituals and folklore. Ingrained within us
is the philosophy that ‘entire natural world be in harmony’ which is
reflected in the famous phrase in Sanskrit ‘Vasudhaiv kutumbakam’ that
means “the entire earth is one family”. The phrase is mentioned in
‘Mahaupanishad’, that is probably a part of the ancient Indian text,
Atharva Veda.
In Class IX we have already learnt about some natural resources
like soil, air and water and how various components are cycled over and
over again in nature. Also, we learnt in the previous chapter about the
pollution of these resources because of some of our activities. In this
chapter, we shall look at some of our resources and how we are using
them. Maybe we should also think about how we ought to be using our
resources so as to sustain them and conserve our environment. We shall
be looking at our natural resources like forests, wildlife, water, coal and
petroleum and see what are the issues at stake in deciding how these
resources are to be managed for sustainable development along with
the input from our traditional practices.
We often hear or read about environmental problems. These are often
global-level problems and we feel helpless to bring any change. There
are international laws and regulations, and then there are our own
national laws and acts for environmental protection. There are also
national and international organisations working towards protecting our
environment.

Activity 16.1
n
n

Find out about the international norms to regulate the emission
of carbon dioxide.
Have a discussion in class about how we can contribute towards
meeting those norms.

Science

266

2020-21

Activity 16.2
n

n

There are a number of organisations that seek to spread awareness
about our environment and promote activities and attitudes that
lead to the conservation of our environment and natural resources.
Find out about the organisation(s) active in your neighbourhood/
village/town/city.
Find out how you can contribute towards the same cause.

Awareness about the problems caused by unthinkingly exploiting
our resources has been a fairly recent phenomenon in our society. And
once this awareness rises, some action is usually taken. You must have
heard about the Ganga Action Plan. This multi-crore project came about
in 1985 because the quality of the water in the Ganga was very poor.
Coliform is a group of bacteria, found in human intestines, whose
presence in water indicates contamination by disease-causing
microorganisms.

Figure 16.1 Total coliform count levels in the Ganga
Source: Central Pollution Control Board, 2012

267

Sustainable Management of Natural Resources

2020-21

Do You Know?

Pollution of the Ganga
The Ganga runs its course of over 2500 km from Gangotri in the Himalayas to Ganga
Sagar in the Bay of Bengal. It is being turned into a drain by more than a hundred
towns and cities in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal that pour their garbage
and excreta into it. Largely untreated sewage is dumped into the Ganges every
day. In addition, think of the pollution caused by other human activities like
bathing, washing of clothes and immersion of ashes or unburnt corpses. And then,
industries contribute chemical effluents to the Ganga’s pollution load and the
toxicity kills fish in large sections of the river. Namami Gange Programme is an
Integrated Conservation Mission approved as a Flagship Programme by the Union
Government in June, 2014. It was launched to accomplish the twin objectives of effective
abatement of pollution conservation and rejuvenation of River Ganga. The National
Mission for Clean Ganga is the implementation wing set up in October, 2016.
As you can see, there are some measurable factors which are used
to quantify pollution or the quality of the water that we use for various
activities. Some of the pollutants are harmful even when present in very
small quantities and we require sophisticated equipment to measure
them. But as we learnt in Chapter 2, the pH of water is something that
can easily be checked using universal indicator.

Activity 16.3
n
n
n

Check the pH of the water supplied to your house using universal
indicator or litmus paper.
Also check the pH of the water in the local waterbody (pond, river,
lake, stream).
Can you say whether the water is polluted or not on the basis of
your observations?

We need not feel powerless or overwhelmed by the scale of the
problems because there are many things we can do to make a difference.
You must have come across the five R’s to save the environment: Refuse,
Reduce, Reuse, Repurpose and Recycle. What do they refer to?
Refuse:

This means to say No to things people offer you that you
don’t need. Refuse to buy products that can harm you and
the environment, say No to single-use plastic carry bags.

Reduce:

This means that you use less. You save electricity by
switching off unnecessary lights and fans. You save water
by repairing leaky taps. Do not waste food. Can you think
of other things that you can reduce the usage of ?
This is actually even better than recycling because the
process of recycling uses some energy. In the ‘reuse’
strategy, you simply use things again and again. Instead
of throwing away used envelopes, you can reverse it and
use it again. The plastic bottles in which you buy various
food-items like jam or pickle can be used for storing things
in the kitchen. What other items can we reuse?

Reuse:

Science

268

2020-21

Repurpose:

This means when a product can no more be used for the
original purpose, think carefully and use it for some other
useful purpose. For example, cracked crockery, or cups
with broken handles can be used to grow small plants
and as feeding vessels for birds.

Recycle:

This means that you collect plastic, paper, glass and metal
items and recycle these materials to make required things
instead of synthesising or extracting fresh plastic, paper,
glass or metal. In order to recycle, we first need to segregate
our wastes so that the material that can be recycled is not
dumped along with other wastes. Does your village/town/
city have a mechanism in place for recycling these materials?

Even while making everyday choices, we can make environmentfriendly decisions. For doing this, we need to know more about how our
choices affect the environment, these effects may be immediate or longterm or long-ranging. The concept of sustainable development
encourages forms of growth that meet current basic human needs, while
preserving the resources for the needs of future generations. Economic
development is linked to environmental conservation. Thus sustainable
development implies a change in all aspects of life. It depends upon the
willingness of the people to change their perceptions of the socio-economic
and environmental conditions around them, and the readiness of each
individual to alter their present use of natural resources.

Activity 16.4
n

n
n

Have you ever visited a town or village after a few years of absence?
If so, have you noticed new roads and houses that have come up
since you were there last? Where do you think the materials for
making these roads and buildings have come from?
Try and make a list of the materials and their probable sources.
Discuss the list you have prepared with your classmates. Can
you think of ways in which the use of these materials be reduced?

16.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?
Not just roads and buildings, but all the things we use or consume –
food, clothes, books, toys, furniture, tools and vehicles – are obtained
from resources on this earth. The only thing we get from outside is energy
which we receive from the Sun. Even this energy is processed by living
organisms and various physical and chemical processes on the earth
before we make use of it.
Why do we need to use our resources carefully? Because these are
not unlimited and with the human population increasing at a
tremendous rate due to improvement in health-care, the demand for all
resources is increasing at an exponential rate. The management of
natural resources requires a long-term perspective so that these will
last for the generations to come and will not merely be exploited to the
269

Sustainable Management of Natural Resources

2020-21

hilt for short-term gains. This management should also ensure equitable
distribution of resources so that all, and not just a handful of rich and
powerful people, benefit from the development of these resources.
Another factor to be considered while we exploit these natural
resources is the damage we cause to the environment while these
resources are either extracted or used. For example, mining causes
pollution because of the large amount of slag which is discarded for
every tonne of metal extracted. Hence, sustainable natural resource
management demands that we plan for the safe disposal of these
wastes too.
The present day global concerns for sustainable development and
conservation of natural resources are of recent origin as compared to
the long tradition and culture of nature conservation in our country.
Principles of conservation and sustainable management were well
established in the pre-historic India.
Our ancient literature is full of such examples where values and
sensitivity of humans towards nature was glorified and the principle of
sustainability was established at its best.

Activity 16.5
n

Observe various traditional practices for conservation of nature
in your day-to-day life. Share within the peer group. Make a report

and submit.
Indian texts such as Upanishads and Smritis contain many descriptions on the
uses and management of forests, and highlight sustainability as an implicit theme.
One hymn from Atharva Veda ||12.1.11||, later translated into English in the book
Atharva Veda — the Sanskrit Text with English Translation, written by Devi Chand
in 1997, reads:

“O Earth! Pleasant be thy hills, snow-clad mountains and forests; O numerous
coloured, firm and protected earth! On this earth I stand, undefeated, unslain,
unhurt.”
Another hymn that reveals utilisation and regeneration principles from
Atharva Veda ||12.1.35|| reads:

“Whatever I dig out of you, O Earth! May that have quick regeneration again;
may we not damage thy vital habitat and heart.”
During the Vedic period, both productive as well as protective aspect
of forest vegetation were emphasised. Agriculture emerged as a dominant
economic activity during the later Vedic period. This was the time when

Science

270

2020-21

the concept of cultural landscape such as sacred forests and groves,
sacred corridors and a variety of ethno-forestry practices were evolved
that continued to the post-Vedic period, besides a wide range of ethnoforestry practices were infused with the traditions, customs and rituals
and followed as a means for protection of nature and natural resource.

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

What changes can you make in your habits to become more environmentfriendly?

2.

What would be the advantages of exploiting resources with short-term aims?

3.

How would these advantages differ from the advantages of using a longterm perspective in managing our resources?

4.

Why do you think that there should be equitable distribution of resources?
What forces would be working against an equitable distribution of our resources?

?

16.2 FORESTS AND WILDLIFE
Forests are ‘biodiversity hotspots’. One measure of the biodiversity of an
area is the number of species found there. However, the range of different
life forms (bacteria, fungi, ferns, flowering plants, nematodes, insects,
birds, reptiles and so on) found, is also important. One of the main aims
of conservation is to try and preserve the biodiversity we have inherited.
Experiments and field studies suggest that loss of diversity may lead to
loss of ecological stability.

16.2.1 Stakeholders
Activity 16.6
n
n
n
n

Make a list of forest produce that you use.
What do you think a person living near a forest would use?
What do you think a person living in a forest would use?
Discuss with your classmates how these needs differ or do not
differ and the reasons for the same.

We all use various forest produce. But our dependency on forest
resources varies. Some of us have access to alternatives, some do not.
When we consider the conservation of forests, we need to look at the
stakeholders who are –
(i) the people who live in or around forests are dependent on forest
produce for various aspects of their life (see Fig. 16.2).
(ii) the Forest Department of the Government which owns the land
and controls the resources from forests.
(iii) the industrialists – from those who use ‘tendu’ leaves to make
bidis to the ones with paper mills – who use various forest produce,
but are not dependent on the forests in any one area.
(iv) the wildlife and nature enthusiasts who want to conserve nature
in its pristine form.

271

Sustainable Management of Natural Resources

2020-21

Figure 16.2
A view of a forest life

Let us take a look at what each of these groups needs/gets out of the
forests. The local people need large quantities of firewood, small timber
and thatch. Bamboo is used to make slats for huts, and baskets for
collecting and storing food materials. Implements for agriculture, fishing
and hunting are largely made of wood, also forests are sites for fishing
and hunting. In addition to the people gathering fruits, nuts and
medicines from the forests, their cattle also graze in forest areas or feed
on the fodder which is collected from forests.
Do you think such use of forest resources would lead to the
exhaustion of these resources? Do not forget that before the British came
and took over most of our forest areas, people had been living in these
forests for centuries. They had developed practices to ensure that the
resources were used in a sustainable manner. After the British took
control of the forests (which they exploited ruthlessly for their own
purposes), these people were forced to depend on much smaller areas
and forest resources started becoming over-exploited to some extent.
The Forest Department in independent India took over from the British
but local knowledge and local needs continued to be ignored in the
management practices. Thus vast tracts of forests have been converted
to monocultures of pine, teak or eucalyptus. In order to plant these
trees, huge areas are first cleared of all vegetation. This destroys a large
amount of biodiversity in the area. Not only this, the varied needs of the
local people – leaves for fodder, herbs for medicines, fruits and nuts for
food – can no longer be met from such forests. Such plantations are
useful for the industries to access specific products and are an important
source of revenue for the Forest Department.
Do you know how many industries are
based on forest produce? A short count reveals
timber, paper, lac and sports equipment.
Industries would consider the forest as
merely a source of raw material for its factories.
And huge interest-groups lobby the government
for access to these raw materials at artificially
low rates. Since these industries have a greater
reach than the local people, they are not
interested in the sustainability of the forest in
one particular area. For example, after cutting
down all the teak trees in one area, they will get
their teak from a forest farther away. They do not have any stake in
ensuring that one particular area should yield an optimal amount of
some produce for all generations to come. What do you think will stop
the local people in behaving in a similar manner?

Activity 16.7
n
n

Find out about any two forest produce that are the basis for an
industry.
Discuss whether this industry is sustainable in the long run. Or
do we need to control our consumption of these products?

Science

272

2020-21

Lastly, we come to the nature and wildlife enthusiasts who are in no
way dependent on the forests, but who may have considerable say in
their management. The conservationists were initially taken up with large
animals like lions, tigers, elephants and rhinoceros. They now recognise
the need to preserve biodiversity as a whole. But shouldn’t we recognise
people as forming part of the forest system? There have been enough
instances of local people working traditionally for conservation of forests.
For example, the case of Bishnois community living in western Rajasthan
on the border of the Thar desert. Conservation of forest and wildlife has
been a religious tenet for them. These nature-loving people have for
centuries, been conserving the flora and fauna to the extent of sacrificing
their lives to protect the environment. They are living with the basic
philosophy that all living things have a right to survive and share all
resources. The Government of India has recently instituted an ‘Amrita
Devi Bishnoi National Award for Wildlife Conservation’ in the memory of
Amrita Devi Bishnoi, who in 1731 sacrificed her life along with 363 others
for the protection of ‘khejri’ trees in Khejrali village near Jodhpur in
Rajasthan.
Studies have shown that the prejudice against the traditional use of
forest areas has no basis. Here is an example – the great Himalayan
National Park contains, within its reserved area, alpine meadows which
were grazed by sheep in summer. Nomadic shepherds drove their flock
up from the valleys every summer. When this national park was formed,
this practice was put to an end. Now it is seen that without the regular
grazing by sheep the grass first grows very tall, and then falls over
preventing fresh growth.
Management of protected areas by keeping the local people
out or by using force cannot possibly be successful in the long
run. In any case, the damage caused to forests cannot be
attributed to only the local people – one cannot turn a blind eye
to the deforestation caused by industrial needs or development
projects like building roads or dams. The damage caused in
these reserves by tourists or the arrangements made for their
convenience is also to be considered.
We need to accept that human intervention has been very
much a part of the forest landscape. What has to be managed in
the nature and what may be the extent of this intervention?
Forest resources ought to be used in a manner that is both
environmentally and developmentally sound – in other words, while the
environment is preserved, the benefits of the controlled exploitation go
to the local people, a process in which decentralised economic growth
and ecological conservation go hand in hand. The kind of economic and
social development we want will ultimately determine whether the
environment will be conserved or further destroyed. The environment
must not be regarded as a pristine collection of plants and animals. It is
a vast and complex entity that offers a range of natural resources for our
use. We need to use these resources with due caution for our economic
and social growth, and to meet our material aspirations.

Figure 16.3
Khejri Tree

273

Sustainable Management of Natural Resources

2020-21

16.2.2 Management of forest
We need to consider if the goals of all the above stakeholders with regard
to the management of the forests are the same. Forest resources are
often made available for industrial use at rates far below the market
value while these are denied to the local people. The Chipko Andolan
(‘Hug the Trees Movement’) was the result of a grassroot level effort to
end the alienation of people from their forests. The movement originated
from an incident in a remote village called Reni in Garhwal, high-up in
the Himalayas during the early 1970s. There was a dispute between the
local villagers and a logging contractor who had been allowed to fell
trees in a forest close to the village. On a particular day, the contractor’s
workers appeared in the forest to cut the trees while the men folk were
absent. Undeterred, the women of the village reached the forest quickly
and clasped the tree trunks thus preventing the workers from felling the
trees. Thus thwarted, the contractor had to withdraw.
Inherent in such a competition to control a natural resource is the
conservation of a replenishable resource. Specifically the method of use
was being called into question. The contractor would have felled the
trees, destroying them forever. The communities traditionally lop the
branches and pluck the leaves, allowing the resource to replenish over
time. The Chipko movement quickly spread across communities and
media, and forced the government, to whom the forest belongs, to rethink
their priorities in the use of forest produce. Experience has taught people
that the destruction of forests affected not just the availability of forest
products, but also the quality of soil and the sources of water.
Participation of the local people can indeed lead to the efficient
management of forests.
An Example of People’s Participation in the Management of Forests
In 1972, the West Bengal Forest Department recognised its failures in
reviving the degraded Sal forests in the south-western districts of the
state. Traditional methods of surveillance and policing had led to a
‘complete alienation of the people from the administration’, resulting in
frequent clashes between forest officials and villagers. Forest and land
related conflicts in the region were also a major factor in fuelling the
militant peasant movements led by the Naxalites.
Accordingly, the Department changed its strategy, making a
beginning in the Arabari forest range of Midnapore district. Here, at the
insistence of a far-seeing forest officer, A.K. Banerjee, villagers were
involved in the protection of 1,272 hectares of badly degraded sal forest.
In return for help in protection, villagers were given employment in both
silviculture and harvesting operations, 25 per cent of the final harvest,
and allowed fuelwood and fodder collection on payment of a nominal
fee. With the active and willing participation of the local community, the

Science

274

2020-21

sal forests of Arabari underwent a remarkable recovery – by 1983, a
previously worthless forest was valued Rs 12.5 crores.

Activity 16.8
Debate the damage caused to forests by the following —
(a) Building rest houses for tourists in national parks.
(b) Grazing domestic animals in national parks.
(c) Tourists throwing plastic bottles/covers and other litter in
national parks.

n

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

1.

Why should we conserve forests and wildlife?

2.

Suggest some approaches towards the conservation of forests.

S

?

16.3 WATER FOR ALL
Activity 16.9
n Villages suffering from chronic water shortage surround a water
theme park in Maharashtra. Debate whether this is the optimum
use of the available water.

Water is a basic necessity for all terrestrial forms of life. We studied in
Class IX about the importance of water as a resource, the water cycle
and how human intervention pollutes waterbodies. However, human
intervention also changes the availability of water in various regions.

Activity 16.10
n
n

Study the rainfall patterns in India from an atlas.
Identify the regions where water is abundant and the regions of
water scarcity.

After the above activity, would you be very surprised to learn that regions
of water scarcity are closely correlated to the regions of acute poverty?
A study of rainfall patterns does not reveal the whole truth behind
the water availability in various regions in India. Rains in India are largely
due to the monsoons. This means that most of the rain falls in a few
months of the year. Despite nature’s monsoon bounty, failure to sustain
water availability underground has resulted largely from the loss of
vegetation cover, diversion for high water demanding crops, and pollution
from industrial effluents and urban wastes. Irrigation methods like dams,
tanks and canals have been used in various parts of India since ancient
times. These were generally local interventions managed by local people
and assured that the basic minimum requirements for both agriculture
and daily needs were met throughout the year. The use of this stored

275

Sustainable Management of Natural Resources

2020-21

water was strictly regulated and the optimum cropping patterns based
on the water availability were arrived at on the basis of decades/centuries
of experience, the maintenance of these irrigation systems was also a
local affair.
The arrival of the British changed these systems as it changed many
other things. The conception of large scale projects – large dams and
canals traversing large distances were first conceived and implemented
by the British and carried on with no less gusto by our newly formed
independent government. These mega-projects led to the neglect of the
local irrigation methods, and the government also increasingly took over
the administration of these systems leading to the loss of control over
the local water sources by the local people.

More to Know!

Kulhs in Himachal Pradesh
Parts of Himachal Pradesh had evolved a local system of canal irrigation called
kulhs over four hundred years ago. The water flowing in the streams was diverted
into man-made channels which took this water to numerous villages down the
hillside. The management of the water flowing in these kulhs was by common
agreement among all the villages. Interestingly, during the planting season, water
was first used by the village farthest away from the source of the kulh, then by
villages progressively higher up. These kulhs were managed by two or three people
who were paid by the villagers. In addition to irrigation, water from these kulhs
also percolated into the soil and fed springs at various points. After the kulhs were
taken over by the Irrigation Department, most of them became defunct and there
is no amicable sharing of water as before.

16.3.1 Dams
Why do we seek to build dams? Large dams can ensure the storage of
adequate water not just for irrigation, but also for generating electricity,
as discussed in the previous chapter. Canal systems leading from these
dams can transfer large amounts of water over great distances. For
example, the Indira Gandhi Canal has brought greenery to considerable
areas of Rajasthan. However, mismanagement of the water has largely
led to the benefits being cornered by a few people. There is no equitable
distribution of water, thus people close to the source grow water intensive
crops like sugarcane and rice while people farther downstream do not
get any water. The woes of these people who have been promised benefits
which never arrived are added to the discontentment among the people
who have been displaced by the building of the dam and its canal network.
In the previous chapter, we mentioned the reasons for opposition to
the construction of large dams, such as the Tehri Dam on the river Ganga.
You must have read about the protests by the Narmada Bachao Andolan
(‘Save the Narmada Movement’) about raising the height of the Sardar
Sarovar Dam on the river Narmada. Criticisms about large dams address
three problems in particular –
(i) Social problems because they displace large number of peasants
and tribals without adequate compensation or rehabilitation,
(ii) Economic problems because they swallow up huge amounts of
public money without the generation of proportionate benefits,
Science

276

2020-21

(iii) Environmental problems because they contribute enormously
to deforestation and the loss of biological diversity.
The people who have been displaced by various development projects
are largely poor tribals who do not get any benefits from these projects
and are alienated from their lands and forests without adequate
compensation. The oustees of the Tawa Dam built in the 1970s are still
fighting for the benefits they were promised.

16.3.2 Water Harvesting

A traditional technology is helping
India’s “waterman” save thousands of
parched villages and transform the lives of
thousands of villagers in one of India’s
most arid regions. In “two decades of efforts
of Dr. Rajendra Singh, 8,600 johads and
other structures to collect water have been
built in Rajasthan,” and “Water had been
brought back to a 1,000 villages across the
state.” In 2015, he won the Stockholm
Water Prize. It is the most prestigious
award which honours a person who
contributes to the conservation and
protection of water resources for the wellbeing of the planet and its inhabitants.

Watershed management emphasises scientific
soil and water conservation in order to increase
the biomass production. The aim is to develop
primary resources of land and water, to
produce secondary resources of plants and
animals for use in a manner which will not
cause ecological imbalance. Watershed
management not only increases the production
and income of the watershed community, but
also mitigates droughts and floods and
increases the life of the downstream dam and
reservoirs. Various organisations have been
working on rejuvenating ancient systems of
water harvesting as an alternative to the ‘megaprojects’ like dams. These communities have used hundreds of
indigenous water saving methods to capture every trickle of water that
had fallen on their land; dug small pits and lakes, put in place simple
watershed systems, built small earthen dams, constructed dykes, sand
and limestone reservoirs, set up rooftop water-collecting units. This has
recharged groundwater levels and even brought rivers back to life.
Water harvesting is an age-old concept in India. Khadins, tanks and
nadis in Rajasthan, bandharas and tals in Maharashtra, bundhis in
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, ahars and pynes in Bihar, kulhs in
Himachal Pradesh, ponds in the Kandi belt of Jammu region, and eris
(tanks) in Tamil Nadu, surangams in Kerala, and kattas in Karnataka
are some of the ancient water harvesting, including water conveyance,
structures still in use today (see Fig. 16.4 for an example). Water
harvesting techniques are highly locale specific and the benefits are also
localised. Giving people control over their local water resources ensures
that mismanagement and over-exploitation of these resources is
reduced/removed.
In largely level terrain, the water harvesting structures are mainly
crescent shaped earthen embankments or low, straight concrete-andrubble “check dams” built across seasonally flooded gullies. Monsoon
rains fill ponds behind the structures. Only the largest structures hold
water year round; most dry up six months or less after the monsoons.
Their main purpose, however, is not to hold surface water but to recharge
the ground water beneath. The advantages of water stored in the ground

277

Sustainable Management of Natural Resources

2020-21

are many. It does not evaporate, but spreads out to recharge wells and
provides moisture for vegetation over a wide area. In addition, it does
not provide breeding grounds for mosquitoes like stagnant water collected
in ponds or artificial lakes. The groundwater is also relatively protected
from contamination by human and animal waste.

Figure 16.4 Traditional water harvesting system — an ideal setting of the khadin system

Q

U

E

S

T

I

O

N

S

1.

Find out about the traditional systems of water harvesting/
management in your region.

2.

Compare the above system with the probable systems in hilly/
mountainous areas or plains or plateau regions.

3.

Find out the source of water in your region/locality. Is water from this
source available to all people living in that area?

16.4 COAL AND PETROLEUM

?

We have seen some of the issues involved in the conservation and
sustainable use of resources like forests, wildlife and water. These can
meet our needs perpetually if we were to use them in a sustainable
manner. Now we come to yet another important resource – fossil fuels,
that is, coal and petroleum, which are important sources of energy for
us. Since the industrial revolution, we have been using increasing
amounts of energy to meet our basic needs and for the manufacture of a
large number of goods upon which our lives depend. These energy needs
have been largely met by the reserves of coal and petroleum.
The management of these energy sources involves slightly different
perspectives from those resources discussed earlier. Coal and petroleum
were formed from the degradation of bio-mass millions of years ago and
hence these are resources that will be exhausted in the future no matter
how carefully we use them. And then we would need to look for alternative
sources of energy. Various estimates exist as to how long these resources
Science

278

2020-21

will last if the present rate of usage continues. It is estimated that our
known petroleum resources will last us for about forty years and the
coal resources will last for another two hundred years.
But looking at other sources of energy is not the only consideration
when we look at the consumption of coal and petroleum. Since coal
and petroleum have been formed from bio-mass, in addition to carbon,
these contain hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur. When these are burnt,
the products are carbon dioxide, water, oxides of nitrogen and oxides
of sulphur. When combustion takes place in insufficient air (oxygen),
then carbon monoxide is formed instead of carbon dioxide. Of these
products, the oxides of sulphur and nitrogen and carbon monoxide
are poisonous at high concentrations and carbon dioxide is a
greenhouse gas. Another way of looking at coal and petroleum is that
they are huge reservoirs of carbon and if all of this carbon is converted
to carbon dioxide, then the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
is going to increase, leading to intense global warming. Thus, we need
to use these resources judiciously.

Activity 16.11
n Coal is used in thermal power stations and petroleum products
like petrol and diesel are used in means of transport like motor
vehicles, ships and aeroplanes. We cannot really imagine life
without a number of electrical appliances and constant use of
transportation. So can you think of ways in which our consumption
of coal and petroleum products be reduced?

Some simple choices can make a difference in our energy consumption
patterns. Think over the relative advantages, disadvantages and
environment-friendliness of the following –
(i) Taking a bus, using your personal vehicle or walking/cycling.
(ii) Using LED bulbs or fluorescent tubes in your homes.
(iii) Using the lift or taking the stairs.
(iv) Wearing an extra sweater or using a heating device (heater or
‘sigri’) on cold days.
The management of coal and petroleum also addresses the efficiency
of our machines. Fuel is most commonly used in internal combustion
engines for transportation and recent research in this field concentrates
on ensuring complete combustion in these engines in order to increase
efficiency and also reduce air pollution.

Activity 16.12
n

You must have heard of the Euro I and Euro II norms for emission
from vehicles. Find out how these norms work towards reducing
air pollution.

279

Sustainable Management of Natural Resources

2020-21

AL RESOURCE
TURAL
NATUR
1 6 . 5 AN OVERVIEW OF NA
TUR
MANAGEMENT
Sustainable management of natural resources is a difficult task. In
addressing this issue, we need to keep an open mind with regard to the
interests of various stakeholders. We need to accept that people will act
with their own best interests as the priority. But the realisation that
such selfish goals will lead to misery for a large number of people and a
total destruction of our environment is slowly growing. Going beyond
laws, rules and regulations, we need to tailor our requirements,
individually and collectively, so that the benefits of development reach
everyone now and for all generations to come.

What you have learnt
n

n

n

n

n

Our resources like forests, wildlife, water, coal and petroleum need to be used in
a sustainable manner.
We can reduce pressure on the environment by sincerely applying the maxim of
‘Refuse, Reduce, Reuse, Repurpose and Recycle’ in our lives.
Management of forest resources has to take into account the interests of various
stakeholders.
The harnessing of water resources by building dams has social, economic and
environmental implications. Alternatives to large dams exist. These are localespecific and may be developed so as to give local people control over their local
resources.
The fossil fuels, coal and petroleum, will ultimately be exhausted. Because of this
and because their combustion pollutes our environment, we need to use these
resources judiciously.

E X E R C I S E S
1. What changes would you suggest in your home in order to be environment-friendly?
2. Can you suggest some changes in your school which would make it environmentfriendly?
3. We saw in this chapter that there are four main stakeholders when it comes to
forests and wildlife. Which among these should have the authority to decide the
management of forest produce? Why do you think so?
4. How can you as an individual contribute or make a difference to the management
of (a) forests and wildlife, (b) water resources and (c) coal and petroleum?
5. What can you as an individual do to reduce your consumption of the various
natural resources?
6. List five things you have done over the last one week to —
(a) conserve our natural resources.
(b) increase the pressure on our natural resources.
7. On the basis of the issues raised in this chapter, what changes would you
incorporate in your lifestyle in a move towards a sustainable use of our resources?

Science

280

2020-21

