Long Answer Questions

Q.1. Describe any two major issues between India and Pakistan which led to war
of 1971.
[CBSE Delhi 2013]
Ans. War of 1971 held because of two main reasons:
(i) Refugee problem in 1971: A disintegrated Pakistan came in elections of 1970.
Parties of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and Sheikh Mujibur succeeded in Western and Eastern
Pakistan respectively. Bengali population of eastern Pakistan voted heavily against
Western Pakistan. Rulers of Western Pakistan considered citizens of eastern Pakistan
as ‘another level’ citizens. Pakistan didn’t consider decision of democracy taken by
eastern Pakistan valid. They also refused to convene the assembly of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman. Sheikh Mujibur was arrested and Pakistani army tried to suppress the mass
movement of the Bengali people. This led to a large scale migration into India, creating
a huge refugee problem in India. The government of India supported people of east
Pakistan. Consequently, India had a war with Pakistan.
(ii) To support Bangladesh for its independence: In 1971, people of eastern
Pakistan resented the domination of Western Pakistan and the imposition of an Urdu
language. Thousands were killed by the Pakistani army which led to huge scale
migration into India. India too gave them shelter. In addition to this, India support
Bangladesh in its struggle for independence. Pakistan strongly opposed this step of
India and attacked on its airports on 3 December, 1971. Indian army too attacked
Pakistan. Pakistan lost the war which resulted in the transformation of eastern Pakistan
into newly independent country ‘Bangladesh’.
Q.2. ‘Pakistan has witnessed both civilian and democratic system’. Explain.
Ans. Pakistan has witnessed civilian system many times despite of citizens aspiration
for democracy. In last 65 years, almost 29-30 years were ruled by civilians in Pakistan
from 1947 to 2012. General Ayub Khan, General Yahya, General Zia-ul-Haq and
General Pervez Musharraf were among the leaders of civil-rule. The first military rule
inPakistan was established under the leadership of General Ayub Khan and was
succeeded in announcing constitution ruler of Pakistan through the drama of elections.
But he couldn’t befool public and public outrage increased. Unstability and
dissatisfaction against him was increasing in Pakistan army. General Yahya took
advantage, overthrew the government and himself became the dictator. Separation of
eastern part of Pakistan and Pakistan’s defeat from India banished Yahya Khan from
his power and an elected government under the leadership of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto came
into power. Within the period of 7 years, Bhutto government was removed by General
Zia-ul-Haq by a military revolution and was hanged after sometime.Dissatisfaction

towards military rule of General Zia-ul-Haq and democratic government under the
leadership of Benezir Bhutto, daughter of Bhutto was established in Pakistan. According
to the structure of political democratic structure of Pakistan from 1988 to 1999, Benezir
Bhutto’s government centered around Pakistan People’s Party and Muslim league of
Nawaz Sharif. In starting of 1999, military under leadership of General Parvez
Musharraf overthrew government of Nawaz Sharif, Prime Minister of Pakistan and was
dismissed from Pakistan. General Musharraf got himself elected as the President.
Announcement of emergency in Pakistan was done in the last months of 2006.
Elections were planned on 8 January 2008 but were postponed due to death of Benezir
Bhutto during campaigning. Recently, ordinary elections took place in Pakistan, where
Pakistan Muslim League (PML) was formed and Nawaz Sharif was elected as Prime
Minister.
Q.3. Even after sharing a same history, why roots of democracy could not be
strengthened in Pakistan as they are in India?
[CBSE (AI) 2011]
Ans. The reasons behind unstable democracy in Pakistan are as follows:
(i) The social dominance of the military, clergy and landowning aristocracy has led to
the frequent overthrow of elected governments and the establishment of military
government. Pakistan’s conflict with India has made the pro-military groups more
powerful. These groups have often said that political parties and democracy inPakistan
are flawed, that Pakistan’s security would be harmed by selfish-minded parties and
chaotic democracy, and that army’s stay in power, is therefore, justified. While
democracy has not been fully successful in Pakistan, there has been a strong prodemocracy sentiment in the country.
(ii) Pakistan has a courageous and relatively free press and a strong human rights
movement. The lack of genuine international support for its democratic rule in Pakistan
has further encouraged the military to continue its dominance. The United States and
other western countries have encouraged the military’s authoritarian rule in the past, for
their own reasons. Given the fact that the threat of what they call as ‘Global Islamic
Terrorism’ and the apprehension that Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal might fall into the
hands of these terrorist groups, the military regime in Pakistan has been seen as the
protector of Western interests in West Asia and South Asia.
Q.4. Explain any three factors that are responsible for the failure of building a
stable democratic rule in Pakistan.
Ans. The factors responsible for the failure of building a stable democratic rule in
Pakistanare as follows:
1. The social dominance of the military, clergy and landowning aristocracy has led to
frequent overthrow of elected governments and establishment of military governments.

2. Pakistan’s conflict with India also made the pro military groups more powerful. These
groups have often said that political parties and democracy in Pakistan are flawed; that
Pakistan’s security would be harmed by selfish minded parties and chaotic democracy
and that army’s stay in power is, therefore, justified.
3. The lack of genuine international support for democratic rule in Pakistan has further
encouraged military to continue its dominance.
Q.5. Describe India-Nepal relationship.
Ans. India has special friendly relationship with world’s only Hindu country, Nepal.
Citizens of Nepal enjoy special benefits in trade and commerce in India. Large number
of natives of Nepal have shown bravery in Indian army. India has assisted Nepal in its
many plans and projects. India has played a major role in getting Nepal independence
from autocracy of Rana dynasty. An agreement of peace, friendship and trade was
signed by both the countries on 31 July, 1950. Special facilities have been given to India
by Nepal. Some disputes occurred when India supported democratic movement against
Mahendra, King of Nepal. Nepal’s trust was re-established when Indira Gandhi, Prime
Minister of India visited Nepal. Nepal provided port facility to Kolkata after signing TTT,
which accelerated normalisation of Indo-Nepal relationship. The tensions of 1989 were
resolved due to re-establishment of multilateral system. TTT was revised by both the
countries in 1991 and 2002. United River Development Project agreement was signed
in 1996 by both the countries and agreed on cooperation with the help of SAARC. Reestablishment of democracy in Nepal strengthen Indo-Nepal relationship. Both are
engaged in identifying regions of cooperation and collective benefits. Stability to IndoNepal relationship and emergence of Free Trade Area in South Asia will be accelerated
because of the Maoists and seven teams agreement in 2007. Indian Prime Minister
visited Nepal in 2015 and proposed to resolve matters peacefully. He promised to assist
Nepal to resolve destruction occurred due to earthquake in Nepal. At present, IndoNepal relations are peaceful and India tries its level best to help Nepal.
Q.6. Give a brief description of relationship of India and the Maldives.
Ans. India’s ties with the Maldives remain warm and cordial. Islamic region, the
Maldives is deeply associated with India. Port of Indian navy, soldiers was established
at GAN which remained till 1975 during British rule in addition to India’s responsibility of
security of Maldives. The Maldives participated in establishing SAARC in the summit of
foreign ministers of seven states of South Asia – Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, The
Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka organised at New Delhi, Capital of India in
1983. In November 1988, some handful of terrorists tried to overthrow Abdul Gayum
government with foreign help. On the request of President of the Maldives, India sent its
army and completely defeated conspirators. Indian army stayed at the Maldives for a
year until the government of the Maldives got stable and returned India on 3 November,
1989. The Maldives successfully organised the 5th SAARC summit in its capital, Male’
in 1990. India is Supporting the Maldives in its plans. It has given Indira Gandhi

Memorial Hospital to it as a gift. Peaceful, affectionate, free from problems and high
levelled relationship can be seen between both the countries. Citizens of the Maldives
are getting trained in Indian Institutes of Technology. The Joint Commission was
formalised between both the countries in 1990, which illustrates the progress &
development of bilateral programmes and decides future plans.
Q.7. Explain ups and downs in Indo-Bangladesh relationship.
Or
Assess the positive and negative aspects of India’s relations with Bangladesh.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans. India played a major role in the formation of Bangladesh. It was due to India’s
efforts and immediate help from Soviet Union that Bangladesh gained membership of
UNO. The governments of India and Bangladesh have had differences over several
issues including the sharing of the Ganga and Brahmaputra river waters. The Indian
government has been unhappy with Bangladesh’s denial of illegal immigration to India,
its support for anti-Indian Islamic fundamentalist groups, Bangladesh’s refusal to allow
Indian troops to move through its territory to northeastern India, and its decision not to
export natural gas to India or allow Myanmar to do so through Bangladeshi territory.
Bangladeshi governments have felt that the Indian government behaves like a regional
bully over the sharing of river waters, encouraging rebellion in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts, trying to extract its natural gas and being unfair in trade. The two countries have
not succeeded in resolving their boundary dispute. Despite their differences, India and
Bangladesh do cooperate on many issues. Economic relations have improved
considerably in the last ten years. Bangladesh is a part of India’s Look East Policy that
wants to link up with Southeast Asia via Myanmar. On disaster management and
environmental issues, the two states have cooperated regularly. Efforts are on to
broaden the areas of cooperation further by identifying common threats and being more
sensitive to other’s needs.
Q.8. Describe the series of events that led to the formation of Bangladesh.
[CBSE Sample Paper 2016]
Ans. The series of events that led to the formation of Bangladesh are:
1. The people of East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) resented the domination of western
Pakistan and imposition of Urdu language.
2. Soon after the partition, they began protests against the unfair treatment meted out to
the Bengali culture and language. They also demanded fair representation in
administration and a fair share in political power.
3. Sheikh Mujibur Rehman led the popular struggle against West Pakistani domination.
He demanded autonomy for the eastern region. In 1970 elections in the then Pakistan,

the Awami league led by Shiekh Mujib won all seats in East Pakistan and secured
majority in the proposed constituent assembly for the whole of Pakistan. But the
government dominated by the West Pakistan refused to convene the assembly.
4. Shiekh Mujib was arrested and under the military rule of General Yahya Khan, the
Pakistani army tried to suppress the mass movement of the Bengali people. This led to
a large scale migration into India, creating huge refugee problem for India.
5. The government of India supported the demands of the people of east Pakistan for
their Independence and helped them financially and militarily.
6. This resulted in a war between India and Pakistan in December 1971 that ended in
the formation of Bangladesh as an independent nation.
Q.9. Give a description of India-Sri Lanka relationship by describing ethnic
conflicts of Sri Lanka.
Ans. Sri Lanka is a small island located at South of India. Like India, Sri Lanka has
successfully operated a democratic system since their independence from the British.
But lives of the citizens have become bothersome due to ethnic conflicts. Sri Lanka has
majority of Sri Lankan natives called ‘Sinhalas’. But a large number of Tamils, who had
migrated from India to Sri Lanka are also settled there. They live mainly at Northeastern parts of Sri Lanka. The migration continued even after the independence.
Majority of country, i.e., Sinhalas do not like Tamils living in Sri Lanka. They believe that
Sri Lanka belongs to Sinhalas only. In 1964, ‘Shastri-Sinimavo Bandaranaike
agreement’ was signed to solve the problem concerning Indian Tamils but that couldn’t
be implemented properly.After some years, left wing extremists revolted against
government in Sri Lanka and government was busy in suppressing them. The neglect
and hatred of Tamil by Sinhalas led to fights. Violent fights took place between both
communities in 1983. Sri Lankan army suppressed Tamils heartlessly. A serious
reaction was seen on Tamilians. The ‘Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam’ (LTTE) was
formed and demanded ‘Tamil Eelam’ or a separate country for the Tamils of SriLanka.
Firing by aeroplanes in order to destroy Tamil’s military base by Sri Lankan government
further worsened the situation. Pressure was put on Tamil Nadu government by Tamils
to take measures in the direction of saving their interests and security. The difficulties in
the relationship between the governments of India and Sri Lanka are mostly over ethnic
conflict in the island nation. Indian leaders and citizens find it impossible to remain
neutral when Tamils are politically unhappy and are being killed. After the military
intervention in 1987, the Indian government now prefers a policy of disengagement visà-vis Sri Lanka’s internal troubles. India signed a free trade agreement with Sri Lanka,
which strengthened relations between two-countries. India’s help in post-tsunami
reconstruction in Sri Lanka has also brought the two countries closer.
Q.10. Describe important issues or struggles held between India and Pakistan.
Ans. Following struggles have taken place between India and Pakistan:

1. Country division and Violence: At the time of division of country, it was expected
that demands of Mulsim league related to Pakistan would be met and peace would be
established between both the countries. But this did not happen. Hindus and Sikhs
bearing hair were pushed to India from Pakistan. Property of billions weredestroyed.
Crores were displaced. Modesty of mothers and sisters was destroyed. Its reaction was
seen in India as well and Muslims left India and settled Pakistan.
2. Attack on Kashmir: Pakistan occupied 2/5 part of the Kashmir by attacking India’s
undivided Jammu-Kashmir in 1947. As India believes in the peace policy, the matter
was raised in UNO by India. But Pakistan didn’t follow orders of security council. On the
other side, India, during the war of 1965 and 1971, released Pakistani regions such as
Kashmir, Punjab and Sindh on the basis of Line of Control of 1948 in Jammu and
Kashmir. But still, no cooperation could be seen from Pakistan’s side. Pakistan is hostile
to India. It takes help of separatists of Jammu-Kashmir and Punjab. Pakistani terrorists
have come to Jammu-Kashmir and an undeclared war against India could be sensed.
3. Attack on Kutchh: In January 1965, Pakistan attacked Rann of Kutchh, region of
Gujarat, India. War came to an end between both the countries in June 1965 due to
international pressures. The matter was given to international judgement for final
decision. The problem was thus resolved.
4. Indo-Pakistan War: On September 1965, Pakistan attacked Indian region, Kashmir.
Indian army gave a befitted reply to Pakistan. 740 square miles instead of 240 square
miles of India was occupied. Pakistan agreed to end the war due to international
pressure and internal weeknesses. As per the Tashkent agreement done with the help
of Soviet Union, both the countries got ready to station their armies on the boundaries
before war could start. In the end of 1971, Pakistan again attacked India but Pakistan
had to pay for that. Its eastern alliance Bengal was no longer a part of Pakistan and it
emerged as an independent country called ‘Bangladesh’. It was badly defeated by
Western alliance and war ceased due to international interference. After the formation of
BJP government in March 1998, Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee tried to
maintain better political relationship with Pakistan. Lahore Bus visit was done by him in
February 1999 had this objective. But after some time, Pakistan attacked Kargil area of
Jammu-Kashmir in May 1999. Indian army showed bravery, freed each inch of land of
India from the enemy. Pakistan had a setback at its political front and was isolated at
international front. Pakistan was suspended from the Commonwealth Organisation
(Councils of Commonwealth) because of the unconstitutional overthrow of the
democratically elected government of Pakistan as a serious violation of the
commonwealth’s fundamental political principles (1999). The United States has withheld
$50 million remaining in military reimbursements to Pakistan for fiscal year 2016
because it believes that Islamabad has not done enough to blunt the Islamist militant
Haqqani network. Indo-Pak relations continue to be stressful from the time of kargil war.
All are aware of the fact that Pakistani terrorists are responsible for destructive activities

in Jammu-Kashmir, India. As a result, relationships have become stressful and mutual
discussions between the two countries have stopped.
Q.11. Write about Pakistan’s changing relationship with India.
[CBSE Delhi 2011]
Ans. Indo-Pak changing relationship can be understood by the following points:
1. Pakistan attacked India in 1965 and India too gave a befitting reply. An agreement
was signed by both of them in Tashkent, capital of Uzbekistan, with the help of Soviet
Union. As a result, Pakistan states, which were won by India, returned back to Pakistan.
2. In 1971, a war between India and Pakistan again took place concerning Bangladesh.
Pakistan was badly defeated by India. In addition to this, East Pakistan broke away to
emerge as an independent country called ‘Bangladesh’. Prime Ministers of both the
countries (India and Pakistan) met at Shimla. A treaty called ‘Shimla Pact’ was signed
by them. According to this, both the countries agreed to find solutions to the major
problems peacefully.
3. Ministers and officials of India and Pakistan visited each others country in 1985.
Agreements to improve agriculture, science and technology and trade were signed.
Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi met Pakistani President, General Zia several times. But no
solid outcome was observed. Ms. Benezir Bhutto became Prime Minister ofPakistan in
1988. It was expected that relationship between both the countries would become
cordial due to democracy, but this didn’t happen. The behaviour opted by Prime Minister
of Pakistan, Sh. Nawaz Sharif towards India brought bitterness in Indo-Pak relations.
4. Indo-Pak relations have become better from time to time but promotion to terrorism
and separatists in India by Pakistan have made their relations bitter. Hence, no solution
has been found out so far.
Q.12. Describe common problems of South Asian countries.
[CBSE (AI) 2011]
Ans. 1. Some member countries of SAARC think that SAFTA is a way for India to
‘Invade’ the markets and to influence their societies and politics through commercial
ventures and a commercial presence in their countries. On the other hand, India thinks
that there are real economic benefits for all from SAFTA and that a region that trades
more freely will be able to cooperate better on political issues.
2. SAARC countries have many internal conflicts. Conflicts over issues such as
distribution of river waters and boundaries always continue to remain. India is worried of
Pakistan’s initiated terrorism whereas Pakistan has differences with India over on the
issue of Kashmir. SAARC has not been able to achieve success properlyas they shake
hands but are not unified by their hearts.

3. SAARC countries are unable to express similar views at international level because
they do not trust each other. For instance, views and ideology of India and Pakistan one
always opposite.
4. All Conflicts of South Asia are not just from India and neighbouring countries, but also
from Bhutan, Bangladesh and Nepal over certain issues. For instance, Bangladesh and
Nepal have had some differences over the future of the Himalayan river waters.
5. The other countries of SAARC fear that India wants to be a regionally-dominant
power, given its size and power. It is because of the geography of South Asia, where
India is located centrally and is therefore the only country that borders with others.
6. The main common problems of SAARC countries are poverty and economic
backwardness. Except the condition of Sri Lanka, all other countries are suffering from
poverty, illness and economic backwardness.

