Short Answer Questions

Q.1. How did new world order start?
Ans. It is believed that new world order started in December 1991 after the
disintegration of Soviet Union and the hegemony of US was established in this new
economy. But this cannot be accepted as pure truth as US hegemony was established
at the end of Second World War or even before that at the time of international summits
held between earlier friendly nations. The dominance of US can be seen on Dunbarton
Oaks, Yalta Conference, San Francisco conference and Potsdam conference. This is
also true that from the establishment of UN in 24 October, 1945, US hegemony is still
existing on this world organization. It has also played an important role in decisionmaking of UN over various problems of Korea, Congo, Vietnam, Cyprus, Philistine,
Kashmir, etc. It was appropriately said by scholar that the world affairs were depicted
under the leadership of Britain. Britain’s condition seemed dicey after the Second World
War. It was replaced by USA.
Q.2. To what President George Bush termed as ‘New World Order’?
Or
What is meant by ‘New World Order’?
[CBSE (AI) 2012]
Ans. In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait, rapidly occupying and subsequently
annexing it. After a series of diplomatic attempts failed at convincing Iraq to quit its
aggression, the United Nations mandated the liberation of Kuwait by force. For the UN,
this was a dramatic decision after years of deadlock during the Cold War. The US
president George H.W. Bush hailed it as the emergence of a ‘new world order’.
Q.3. Write brief descriptions of US military power execution during Clinton years.
Ans. There were two major episodes of US military power execution during Clinton
years:
(i) Actions against Yugoslavia: US performed military actions against Yugoslavia in
1999 during Clinton years. The predominantly Albanian population in the province of
KOSOVO was in a great difficulty due to Yugoslavia military. The air forces of the NATO
countries, led by the US, bombarded targets around Yugoslavia for wellover two
months. The downfall of the government of Slobodan Milosevic and the stationing of a
NATO force in Kosovo were its two major consequences.
(i) Operation Infinite Reach: Another significant US military action during the Clinton
years was ‘Operation Infinite Reach’. US embassies in Nairola, Kenya and Dar-es-

Salaam, Tanzania were bombed in 1998. These bombings were attributed to Al-Qaeda,
a terrorist organization strongly influenced by extremist Islamist ideas. President Clinton
ordered ‘Operation Infinite Reach’, a series of cruise missile strikes on Al-Qaeda
terrorists, targets in Sudan and Afghanistan. The US did not bother about the UN
sanction or provisions of international law in this regard.
Q.4. When and why was ‘Operation Enduring Freedom’ launched?
[CBSE Sample Paper 2015]
Ans. As a part of its ‘Global War on Terror’, US launched ‘Operation Enduring Freedom’
in 2001 against all those suspected to be behind 9/11 attack, mainly Al-Qaeda and the
Taliban. Bush, the US President, clearly declared that the overall objective of the
‘Global War on Terror’ was not only to disrupt Al-Qaeda network worldwide but also to
prevent all danger from terrorists teaming with a small groups of nations seeking to
develop nuclear and biological weapons. The Taliban regime was overthrown easily.
The US forces have made arrests throughout the world. Sometimes these arrests have
been without the knowledge of the governments of their home countries.
Q.5. Give a brief description of Iraq War.
Ans. US, in regard to destruction of 9/11, concentrated on Iraq after defeating
Afghanistan. The news was spreaded in the world that Iraq’s President has an illegal
collection of weapons of mass destruction. So, it has become necessary to prevent Iraq
from developing weapons of mass destruction. More than 40 other countries joined and
was named as ‘coalition of the willing’. On 19 March 2003, the US launched its invasion
of Iraq under the codename ‘operation Iraqi freedom’. Even UN’s permission was not
taken for this invasion. The government of Saddam Hussein fell swiftly. Since no
evidence of WMD has been unearthed in Iraq, it is speculated that the invasion was
motivated by other objectives, such as controlling Iraqi oilfields and installing a regime
friendly to the US. Even after winning, US has not been able to ‘pacify’ Iraq. Instead, a
full-fledged insurgencies against US Occupation was ignited in Iraq. While the US has
lost over 3,000 military personnel in the war, Iraqi casualties are very much higher.
50,000 Iraqi civilians have been killed in the US-led invasion.
Q.6. Write a short note on ‘First Gulf War’.
Ans. The ‘First Gulf War’ revealed the vast technological gap that had opened up
between the US military capability and that of other states. The highly publicised use of
socalled ‘smart bombs’ by the US led observers to call this a ‘computer war’.
Widespread television coverage also made it as ‘video game war’, with viewers around
the worldwatching the destruction of Iraqi forces live on TV in the comfort of their living
rooms. Incredibly, the US may actually have made a profit from the war. The US
received more money from countries like Germany, Japan and Saudi Arabia that it had
spent on the war.

Q.7. What do you mean by US hegemony in today’s world? Which two constraints
control US hegemony?
[CBSE Sample Paper 2015]
Ans. US hegemony in today’s world politics means dominance of US at global stage.
After the Collapse of bipolar world, US has emerged as a sole superpower and unipolar
system is established in the world. US hegemony can be seen as hard power, structural
power and soft power. It can interfere in any part of the world in its economy and military
affairs.
There are two constraints on American power:
1. The system of division of American powers among three parts.
2. NATO-NATO is the only organization in International system that could possibly
moderate the exercise of American Power today.
Q.8. What are the constraints on American hegemony today? Which of these do
you expect to get more importance in the future?
[NCERT]
Or
Mention any two constraints that come in the wars of American hegemony.
[CBSE Delhi 2013]
Ans. History tells us that empires decline because they decay from within. Similarly the
biggest constraints to American hegemony lie within the heart of hegemony itself.
Although, none of these constraints seemed to operate in the years following 9/11, but it
now appears that all three of these constraints are slowly beginning to operate again.
These are as follows:
(i) Institutional Architecture of America: The first constraint is the institutional
architecture of America itself. A system of division of powers between the three
branches of the government, places significant breaks upon the unrestrained and
immoderate exercise of America’s military power of the executive branch. This isthe
best example of constraints on American hegemony today.
(ii) Domestic Nature of American Power: The second constraint on American
hegemony is internal and domestic nature of American power. Although the American
mass media may from time to time impose or promote a particular perspective on
domestic public opinion in the US, there is nevertheless a deep skepticism regarding
the purposes and methods of government in American political culture. This factor is a
huge constraint on US military action overseas.
(iii) North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO): NATO is the third most important
factor that imposes a constraint on American power in global politics. Clearly, the US

has an enormous interest in keeping the alliance of democracies that follow the market
economies alive and therefore it is possible that its allies in the NATO will be able to
moderate the exercise of US hegemony.
Q.9. Describe US hegemony as a soft power.
[CBSE (AI) 2014]
Or
‘US’s hegemony as a soft power cannot be denied.’ Comment.
Ans. After the Second World War, America’s cultural superiority along with military and
soft power dominance can also be seen. Here, hegemony implies class ascendancy in
the social, political and particularly ideological spheres. Hegemony arises when the
dominant country can win the consent of dominated classes, by persuading the
dominated classes to view the world in a manner favourable to the ascendancy of the
dominant class. A dominant power deploys notonly military power but also ideological
resources to shape the behavior of competing and lesser powers. Consent, in other
words, goes hand-in-hand with, and often more effective than, coercion. The
predominance of the US in the world today is based not only on its military power and
economic powers, but also on its cultural presence. India’s example can justify this. It is
the dream of every literate Indian that he/she wants to go settle in US by any means
because they feel their future is secured in US. India is adopting culture, living sense of
US. US has been benefitted by this reaction is expanding its dominance. Even during
the Cold War, the society of Soviet Union was very much impressed by the improvised
of US. The youth of Soviet Union was most impressed by wearing the popular blue
jeans. As a result, they used to feel satisfied after purchasing blue jeans from market
ever if they spend their yearly income. These blue jeans were not available in their own
country. During the Cold War, the US found it difficult to score victories against the
Soviet Union in the realm of hard power. It was in the area of structural power and soft
power that the US scored notable victories. The interest of citizens of Soviet Union in
blue jeans clearly shows this. The US culture is very attractive and is most powerful. It is
that aspect of soft power where the country wins the consent of dominated classes.

