Very Short Answer

Q.1. Clarify the traditional conception of security.
[CBSE Delhi 2013]
Or
Define the traditional security.
[CBSE (AI) 2014]
Ans. In the traditional conception of the security, the greatest danger to a country is
from military threats. The source of this danger is another country, which by threatening
military action endangers the core value of sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.
Q.2. How is balance of power a key component of traditional security policy?
[CBSE (AI) 2012]
Ans. Balance of power is a key component of traditional security policy. When countries
look around them, they see that some countries are bigger and stronger. This is a clue
to who might be a threat in the future. That is why, government of one country is
concerned with maintaining a balance of the power with the government of another
country.
Q.3. Mention any two components of security policy of India.
[CBSE Delhi 2011]
Ans. Following are the two components of security policy of India:
1. To secure the entire country and to maintain unity in the country.
2. Not to compromise that might affect sovereignty, dignity and economic interests of
the country.
Q.4. What is meant by war? Does war provide security to people?
Ans. War means bloodshed and huge destruction. War does not provide security to
people. It rather causes death, orphans, diseases, widows and destruction.
Q.5. What are the three choices a country has during the situation of war?
Ans. Following are the choices a country has during war:

1. To surrender

2. To prevent the other side from attacking by promising to raise the costs of war to an
unacceptable level and
3. To defend itself when war actually breaks out so as to deny the attacking country its
objectives or defeat the attacking forces altogether.
Q.6. What do you mean by non-traditional notions of security?
Ans. Non-traditional notions of security go beyond military threats to include a wide
range of threats and dangers affecting the conditions of human existence. The entire
human kind needs security, not just individuals or states according to the supporters of
nontraditional notions of security. List of threatening humankind involves epidemic,
famine and natural calamity.
Q.7. Which treaties were signed by US and USSR for arm control?
Ans. Following treaties were signed by US and USSR:
1. Anti-ballistic Missile Treaty
2. Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty
3. Strategic Arm Reduction Treaty
4. Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty
Q.8. Elaborate any one point to deal with terrorism as a new source of security
threat.
[CBSE Delhi 2011]
Ans. In order to deal with terrorism an established perspective of life should be
developed as compared to castes, religion and nationality. Moral values should be
taught to people. They should be inspired to adopt values such as friendship, kindness
and cooperation. They should be prevented from the influence of destructive powers.
Q.9. Who are involved in the oriented security cooperation at international level?
Ans. Different countries and organisations at national and international levels such as
UNO, WHO, World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and social organisations
such as Red Cross, etc. can be included in the oriented security cooperation at
international level.
Q.10. How are human rights divided into three types?
Ans. Human rights have come to be classified into three types:

1. Political rights
2. Economic and Social rights

3. The rights of colonised people or ethnic and indigenous minorities.
Q.11. Write short note on Global Poverty.
Ans. Global Poverty is another source of insecurity. World Population - now at 650
crore will reach 700 to 800 crore within 25 years and may eventually level out at 900 to
1000 crore. Currently, half of the World’s population growth occurs in just six
countries— India, China, Pakistan, Nigeria, Bangladesh and Indonesia. Among the
World’s poorest countries, population is expected to be triple in the next 50 years,
whereas many rich countries will see population shrinkage in that period. High per
capita income and low population growth make rich states or rich social group get
richer, whereas low incomes and high population growth reinforce each other to make
poor state and poor groups get poorer.

