Long Answer Questions

Q.1. Describe any three new sources of threat to security giving examples for
each.
[CBSE (AI) 2016]
Ans. The new sources of threat are:
(i) Terrorism is a new source of threat. It can be of internal or external nature. It intends
to bring fear and disruption within the minds of the nation rather than invade a nation. It
relies on conflicts with innocent individuals rather than military personnel. Hijacking,
suicide bombings, etc. are forms of terrorism.
(ii) Environmental threats in the form of increased droughts, floods, change in weather,
etc. have caused mass migrations, displacement, outflow of refugees and internal
conflicts. This has given rise to the broader threat towards human security.
(iii) The rise in endemic diseases such as SARS, Zika virus, etc. has spread with
greater access due to globalization and increased movements of people and goods.
Q.2. What is meant by Security? Mention any four components of Indian security
strategy.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans. Security means ‘freedom from threats’.
Four different components of India’s strategy are:
(i) The first component is strengthening its own military capabilities because India has
been involved in conflict with its neighbours, i.e., Pakistan & China.
(ii) The second component has been to strengthen international norms and international
institutions to protect its security.
(iii) The third component is towards meeting security challenges within the country such
as Nagaland, Mizoram, Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir.
(iv) The fourth component has been an attempt to develop its economy and to bring the
citizens out of poverty and economic inequalities.
Q.3. What is meant by traditional notion of external security? Describe any two
components of this type of security.
[CBSE Delhi 2016]
Or

Explain balance of power as a component of traditional security policy. How
could a state achieve this balance?
[CBSE Delhi 2016]
Ans. Traditional notion of external security– The greatest danger to a country is from
military threats. The source of such a security threat emerges from another country
which, through its military action, threatens the core values of sovereignity,
independence and territorial integrity. Military action even endangers the life of ordinary
residents of a country. In a war, it is highly unlikely that only soldiers would die or be
hurt. In all the likelihood, men and women, who are ordinary citizens and soft targets are
made victims in a war, to break their support for the war.
Components of external security:
1. Avoidance of War: Governments may even make the choice of surrender when
actually in a war, but this may not be promoted as a country’s defence policy. Security
policy, is hence, concerned with preventing war, which is known as deterrence, and with
limiting or ending war, which is called defence.
2. Balance of Power: Every country looks around to see potential bigger or stronger
countries which can pose as a threat in the future. For instance, a neighbouring country
might not declare that it is preparing for an attack. But the very fact, that the neighbour
is powerful, points to the fact that in future the neighbour can be aggressive. Over here
we can cite the example of South Asia. Even though India has never declared that it
would attack upon its neighbours– Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Nepal, etc., yet these
countries are skeptical about India’s military designs because of its preparedness, size
and potential. All governments, are therefore, quite sensitive to the ‘Balance of Power’
between their country and other states. They strive hard to maintain a favourable
balance with the other states especially with those with whom they had differences or
conflicts in the past. For maintaining balance of power, they build up military power
along with economic and technological power as the latter two are the very basis of a
country’s hand or military power.
Q.4.Write a note on ‘ways of traditional security policy’.
Ans. The most important of these are disarmament arms control and confidence
building:
1. Disarmament: It requires all states to give up certain kinds of weapons. For
example, the 1972 Biological weapons convention (BWC) and the 1992 Chemical
weapons convention (CWC) banned the production and possession of these weapons.
More than 155 states acceded to the BWC and 181 states acceded to the CWC. Both
conventions include all the great powers. But the superpowers — the US and Soviet
Union did not want to give up the third type of weapons of mass destruction, namely,
nuclear weapons, so they pursued arms control.

2. Arms Control: Arms Control regulates the acquisition or development of weapons.
The Anti-ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty in 1972 tried to stop the United States and Soviet
Union from using ballistic missiles as a defensive shield to launch a nuclear attack.
While it did allow both countries to deploy a very limited number of defensive systems, it
stopped them from large-scale production of those systems. The US and Soviet Union
signed a number of other arms control treaties including the Strategic Arms Limitations
Treaty II or SALT II and the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START). The Nuclear
Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 was an arms control treaty in the sense that it
regulated the acquisition of nuclear weapons. Those countries that had tested and
manufactured nuclear weapons before 1967were allowed to keep their weapons; and
those that had done to were to give up the right to acquire them.
3. Confidence Building: Traditional security also accepts confidence building as a
means of avoiding violence. Confidence building is a process in which countries share
ideas and information with their rivals. They tell each other about their military intentions
and, upto a point, their military plans. This is a way of show that they are not planning a
surprise attack. They also update each other about the kind of forces they possess,
and they may share information on where those forces are deployed. In short,
confidence building is a process designed to ensure that countries do not go to war
through misunderstanding or misperception. All in all, traditional conceptions of security
are principally concerned with the use or threat of use of military force. In traditional
security, force is both the principal threat to security and the principal means of
achieving security.
Q.5. Explain non-traditional conception of security.
Ans. 1. Human security: Human security is all about the protection of people more
than the protection of countries. Human security and state security should be same. But
secure states do not automatically mean secure peoples. Protecting citizens from
foreign attack may be a necessary condition for the security of individuals, but it is
certainly not a sufficient one. Indeed, during the last 100 years, more people have been
killed by their own governments than by foreign armies. All defenders of human security
agree that its primary goal is the protection of individuals. However, there are
differences about precisely what threats individuals should be protected from.
Advocates of the ‘narrow’ concept of human security focus on violent threats to
individuals or, as former UN secretary–General Kofi Annan puts it, “the protection of
communities and individuals from internal violence.” Proponents of the ‘broad’ concept
of human security argue that the threat agenda should include hunger, disease and
natural disasters because these kill far more people than war, genocide and terrorism
combined. Human security policy, they argue, should protect people from these threats
and violence too. In its broadest formulation, the human security agenda also envelops
economic security and ‘threats’ to ‘human dignity’. Put differently, the expansive
formulation stresses what has been called ‘freedom from wants’ and ‘freedom from fear’
respectively.

2. Global Security: The idea of global security emerged in the 1990s in response to the
global nature of threats such as global warming, international terrorism, and health
epidemics like AIDS and bird flu and so on. No country can resolve these problems
alone. And, in some situations, one country may have to disproportionately bear the
brunt of a global problem such as environment degradation. For example, dueto global
warming, a sea level rise of 1.5–2.0 metres would flood 20 percent of Bangladesh,
inundate most of the Maldives, and threaten nearly half the population of Thailand.
Since these problems are global in nature, international cooperation is important, even
though it is difficult to achieve.
Q.6. In spite of strongly propagating for nuclear disarmament since
Independence, India herself became nuclear in 1998. Analyse the reasons behind
this development and also highlight important features of India’s nuclear policy.
[CBSE Sample Paper 2016]
Ans. Reasons for becoming nuclear:
India shares hostile relations with its two immediate neighbours – China and Pakistan.
There was a direct threat to India’s national security as China was already a nuclear
state and had a war with India in 1962. Both the countries do not share very cordial
relations with each other.
Pakistan was also preparing to become nuclear with the help of Chinese government.
So in order to preserve its national security, it was equally important for India to become
a nuclear state.
Features of India’s nuclear policy:
1. India believes in both horizontal and vertical nuclear disarmament. It is ready to
disarm its nuclear weapons if all other counties of the world possessing nuclear
weapons also disarm their nuclear weapons.
2. India has committed that it will never initiate a nuclear war against any country
and will use nuclear weapons only for defensive purpose.
3. It will try to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and would possess only
minimum nuclear deterrence.
4. India strongly opposes NPT and CTBT treaties as they were seen unjust and
discriminatory.
5. It reiterates India’s commitment to global, verifiable and non-discriminatory
nuclear disarmament leading to a nuclear weapon free world.
Q.7. What is meant by traditional notions of internal and external security?
Explain.
[CBSE Delhi 2016]
Ans. Traditional notion of internal security: The traditional notion of internal security
stems from the security of a country within its borders. The nations stem from security

from internal rebellion, dissent and other forms of attacks. After 1945, USA, Soviet
Union and Europe began to see security within their internal borders while newly
independent countries such as from Asia and Africabegan to see civil wars, internal
uprisings, etc. within their borders. Traditional notion of external security: The traditional
notion of external security stems from protecting the territorial integrity of a nation from
aggression and balance of power with other nations. This notion was seen dominant till
the Second World War in North America and Europe but is still continuing in Asia and
Africa.

