Short Answer Questions

Q.1 What is globalisation? Enlighten any three reasons for globalisation.
[CBSE (AI) 2014]
Or
Define globalisation. Explain any three reasons for globalisation.
[CBSE Delhi 2012]
Ans. Globalisation means globalise the social relationship in such a way that events
taking place in some parts of the world could have an impact on another part of the
world. Thus, globalisation is a process in which whole earth became a global village, in
which socio-economic contact is based on mutual cooperation. Main reasons for
Globalisation are as follows:
1. Revolution in Communication Technique: Technology remains a critical element.
There is no doubt that the invention of telegraph, the telephone, and the microchip in
more recent times has revolutionised communication between different parts of the
world. When printing initially came into being, it laid the basis for the creation of
nationalism. Technology has affected us at individual and collective levels.
Technological advancements have stimulated the transfer and movement of capital,
thoughts, commodities and people from one part of the world to another and that too,
easily. The movement of capital and commodities has been more than the movement of
peoples across different parts of the world.
2. Flow of Capital and Commodities: Economic concept of the world has to play an
important role in world politics. The mention of economic globalisation draws our
attention immediately to the role of international institutions like IMF and the WTO and
the role they play in determining economic policies across the world. Yet globalisation
must not be viewed in such narrow terms. Economic globalisation involves many factors
other than these international institutions. A much broader way of understanding of
economic globalisation require us to look at the distribution of economic gains, i.e., who
get the most from globalisation and who gets less, indeed who loses from it.
3. Impact of an event on all the people of World: Globalisation, however, does not
emerge merely because of the availability of improved communications. What is
important is for people in different parts of the world is to recognise these
interconnections with the rest of the world. Currently, we are aware of the fact that
events taking place in one part of the world could have an impact on the another part of
the world. The Bird Flu or Tsunami is not confined to any particular nation. It does not
respect national boundaries. Similarly, when major economic events take place, their

impact is felt outside their immediate local, national or regional environment at the
international level.
Q.2. What is global ‘mutual connection’? What are its components?
[NCERT]
Ans. Global mutual connection means the free flow of ideas, capital commodities and
people from one part of the world to another. In present times, different parts of world
have come close to each other. And its credit goes to the development of means of
communication. The invention of telegraph, the telephone and the microchips has
revolutionised communication between different parts of the world. Printing connected
people living at different corners of the globe. But Globalisation however does not
emerge merely because of the availability of improved communications. But people in
different partsof the world recognise that they are connected to each other. Currently,
we are aware of the fact that events taking place in one part of the world could have an
impact on another part of the world like Bird Flu or Tsunami.
Q.3. How do technologies contribute in the direction of globalisation? Explain.
[CBSE Delhi 2013, CBSE Delhi 2015]
Or
How has technology contributed to the globalisation?
[NCERT]
Ans. Revolution in Communication Technique: Technology remains a critical element.
There is no doubt that the invention of telegraph, the telephone, and the microchip in
more recent times has revolutionised communication between different parts of the
world. When printing initially came into being, it laid the basis for the creation of
nationalism. Technology has affected us at individual and collective levels.
Technological advancements have stimulated the transfer and movement of capital,
thoughts, commodities and people from one part of the world to another and that too,
easily. The movement of capital and commodities has been more than the movement of
peoples across different parts of the world.
Q.4. Why is globalisation a multidimensional concept?
Ans. Globalisation is a multidimensional concept because it cannot be limited within a
certain sphere. Its effect can be seen in all the sectors like economic, political and
cultural. It would be a blunder to accept globalisation only as an economic, political or a
cultural event. The impact of globalisation is vastly uneven— it affects some parts more
than others.
Q.5. Define globalisation. Explain any one criticism for globalisation.
[CBSE Delhi (C) 2014]

Ans.Globalisation means globalise the social relationship in such a manner that events
taking place in one part of the world could have an impact on another part of the world.
Thus globalisation is a process in which whole earth became a global village, in which
socioeconomic contact is based on mutual corporation. Apart from the sphere of
economics and politics, Globalisation has affected us culturally. What we eat, drink,
think and wear reflect our culture. Imposition of Western Culture on the rest of the world
is leading the world to homogenous culture. It is the result of US Hegemony. Cultures
seeking to buy into the dominant American dream is dangerous not only for poor
countries but also for the whole of humanity, for it might lead to the shinkage of the rich
cultural heritage of the entire globe.
Q.6. Clarify any two positive and any two negative effects of globalisation.
[CBSE (AI) 2014]
Ans. Two positive effects of globalisation are as follows:
(i) As a consequence of globalisation, enhanced technologies are available with states.
With these technologies, it has become easy for state to collect information about its
citizens.
(ii) Globalisation improves economical aspects. Economic policy of openness makes
business flourish. The countries following these policies progress and prosper
immensely.
Negative effects of globalisation are as follows:
(i) Globalisation represents a particular phase of global capitalism that makes the rich
richer and the poor poorer.
(ii) Powerfully influenced by the American way of life, globalisation has given rise to the
cultural pollution in many countries of the world.
Q.7. Explain any four reasons for resistance to globalisation.
[CBSE Delhi 2013]
Ans. Following are the reasons for the resistance to globalisation:
(i) Globalisation represents a particular phase of global capitalism that make the rich
richer and the poor poorer.
(ii) Wea kening of the state leads to the reduction in the capacity of the state to protect
the interests of its citizens, especially poor.
(iii) Many countries also fear the weakening of state in political terms. Economically,
they want a return to self-reliance and protectionism, at least in certain areas of the
economy.

(iv) They are worried about their traditional culture that it would be harmed and people
will loose their age-old values and ways.
Q.8. List any four advantages of economic globalisation.
Ans. Following are the merits of economic globalisation:
(i) Globalisation has involved greater trade in commodities across the globe; the
restriction imposed by different countries on allowing the imports of other countries have
been reduced.
(ii) The restrictions on the movement of capital across countries have also been
reduced. Now the investor can invest their money in any country.
(iii) Advocates of economic globalisation argue that it generates greater economic
growth and well-being for larger sections of the population when there is deregulation.
(iv) Greater trade among countries allows each economy to do what it does best. This
would benefit the whole world.

