Short Answer Questions

Q.1. Which socialist parties were formed in Germany, Britain and
France?
Ans. (i) Germany — The Social Democratic Party (SDP)
(ii) Britain — Labour Party
(iii) France — Socialist Party.
Q.2. What was the socialist system?
Ans. Socialists were against private property and felt it to be the root cause
of all socialills. They felt that though property provided employment, it gave
personal gains to property owners, not to the one who contributed to make
the property productive. Socialists wanted that landowners should pay
attention to collective interest, rather than their own personal interests.
Q.3. Describe the visions of Robert Owen and Louis Blanc.
Ans. (i) Robert Owen: He wanted to form a cooperative community called
‘New Harmony’, in Indiana (US). He felt that the government should also
support such cooperatives and encourage them.
He was a French politician, historian and a socialist, who favoured reforms.
(ii) Louis Blanc: He wanted the government to encourage cooperatives and
replace capitalist enterprises. He suggested cooperatives in order to
guarantee employment for the urban poor. He believed that cooperatives
should be formed with the cooperation of the people and its profit should be
divided according to the work done by the members.
Q.4. How were socialist parties formed in various parts of the world?
Ans. Workers in England and Germany began forming workers associations,
for a better living and working conditions. In Germany, these associations
worked closely with the ‘Social Democratic Party’ and helped it win the
parliament seats. They set up funds to help members in times of distress. In
1905, socialists and trade unionists formed a ‘Labour Party’ in Britain and
‘Socialist Party’ in France.
Q.5. Who was ‘father Gapon’? Narrate the events leading to the
‘Bloody Sunday’ incident and the 1905 Revolution.

Ans. Father Gapon was the leader of the procession of workers, who
marched towards the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg.
Events:
● When this procession of workers reached the Winter Palace, it was attacked
by the police.
● Over a hundred workers were killed and about three hundred wounded.
● This incident known as the ‘Bloody Sunday’ started a series of events
leading to the 1905 Revolution.
● Strikes took place, universities closed down and student bodies staged
walkouts.
● Lawyers, doctors and engineers and other middle class workers formed
unions and demanded a constituent assembly.
Q.6. What was the Duma? How far was it successful?
Ans. (i) Duma was an elected legislative body like the parliament having
representatives of the third estate.
(ii) The Tsar dismissed the first Duma within 75 days and the re-elected
Second Duma within three months. He did not want any restrictions or
reductions in his powers. He changed the voting laws and packed the Third
Duma with the conservative politicians. Liberals and revolutionaries were
kept out.
Q.7. What was the impact of World War I on the Russian economy?
Ans. (i) Industrial equipment disintegrated more rapidly in Russia than any
other European country.
(ii) By 1916, railway lines began to break down and all able-bodied men
were called up to the war.
(iii) As a result, there were labour shortages and small workshops producing
essential goods were shut down.
(iv) Since more ration was sent for the army, there was shortage of bread for
the civilians. By the winter of 1916, riots at bread shops were common.
Q.8. How did the Mensheviks resist the protest of the Bolsheviks?
Ans. (i) In industries, committees were formed to question the industrialists
about the way they ran the factories.

(ii) Trade unions were formed and soldiers’ committees were formed in the
army.
(iii) In June, about 500 Soviets sent representatives to an All Russian
Congress of Soviets.
(iv) As the Provisional Government saw the grip of the Bolsheviks becoming
stronger, they decided to take stern measures against the spreading
discontent.
Q.9. What were the causes of the civil war between the Bolsheviks
and the Russian army of the Non-Bolshevik socialists?
Ans. Causes of the civil war were:
(i) When Bolsheviks ordered land re-distribution, the Russian army began to
break up.
(ii) Soldiers, mostly peasants, wished to go home for the redistribution and
deserted.
(iii) Non-Bolshevik socialists, liberals and supporters of autocracy
condemned the Bolshevik uprising.
(iv) Their leaders moved to South Russia and organised troops to fight the
Bolsheviks.
(v) These troops and Bolsheviks fought a civil war; and looting, banditry and
famine became common.

