Short Answer Questions

Q.1. How could English ships be built without a regular supply of
strong and durable timber?
Ans. (i) Search parties of Great Britain were sent to explore the forest
regions of India.
(ii) Within a decade, trees were being felled on a massive scale and vast
quantities of timber were being exported from India.
Q.2. What do you mean by shifting Swidden Agriculture?
Ans. (i) It is a traditional agricultural practice in many parts of Asia, Africa
and South America.
(ii) A piece of land is cleared and cultivation is practiced. When it lost
fertility, they used to shift to the other forest covered area.
Q.3. What restrictions were imposed by the Dutch in Java forest
laws?
Ans. (i) The Java people were not allowed to graze their cattle
(ii) The Java people could not transport wood without permit
(iii) The Java people were not allowed to travel on forest roads with horse
carts or cattle.
Q.4. What are the various uses of forests in our day-to-day lives?
Ans. (i) Paper is used for making books, wood is used for desks and tables,
doors and windows, dyes are used for colouring our clothes, we get spices to
add to our food, the cellophane wrapper of toffees, tendu leaf in bidis, gum,
honey and coffee, tea and rubber.
(ii) Oil in chocolates comes from sal seeds, the tannin used to convert skins
and hides into leather or the herbs used for medical purposes are all derived
from forests.
(iii) Forests also provide bamboo, wood for fuel, grass charcoal, packaging,
fruits, flowers, animals, birds, etc.
Q.5. What were the main causes of deforestation in India during the
British rule?
Ans. The main causes of deforestation were the following:

(i) The British encouraged the production of commercial crops like jute,
sugar, wheat and cotton. The production of foodgrains was needed to feed
the growing urban population and raw material was required for British
industries in Britain.
(ii) The British thought that forests were unproductive. They were of the view
that space covered with forests could be used for cultivation which could
fetch them revenue and enhance the income of the state also.
Q.6. How were forests cleared to expand the railway network in
India in the early 19th century?
Ans. (i) The spread of the railways from the 1850s created a new demand
for timber.
(ii) Railway was needed for the spread of trade in India. To run locomotives,
wood was needed as fuel and to lay railway lines, sleepers were required to
hold the tracks together.
(iii) As the railway tracks spread, a large number of trees were felled. The
government gave contracts to individuals to supply timber.
These contractors began cutting trees indiscriminately.
Q.7. State any three main characteristics of Tropical deciduous
forests.
Ans. Main characteristics of Tropical deciduous forests:
(i) These are the most widespread forests in India.
(ii) They are also called the monsoon forests and are spread over the region.
(iii) They receive rainfall between 70 cm and 200 cm.
(iv) Trees shed their leaves for about six to eight weeks in dry summer.
Q.8. What circumstances led to the foundation of ‘scientific forestry’
by the German expert Dietrich Brandis?
Ans. ● Brandis felt that a proper system had to be adopted to manage
forests and that people had to be trained in the science of conservation.
● He needed legal sanction and rules on the use of forests.
● He felt that the felling of trees and grazing had to be restricted so that
forests could be preserved for timber production.
● He set up the Indian Forest Service in 1864 and helped to formulate the
Indian Forest Act of 1865.

● The Imperial Forest Research Institute was set up at Dehradun in 1906.
● The system they taught here was called ‘scientific forestry’.
Q.9. What do you know about Scientific Forestry?
Ans. (i) In scientific forestry, natural forests which had different types of
trees were cut down. In their place, one type of trees were planted in straight
rows which is called ‘plantation’.
(ii) Forest officials surveyed the forest, estimated the area and made
working plans for the forest management.
(iii) They scientifically planned on how much of the plantation areas to cut
every year. The areas cut were then to be replanted, so that they were ready
to be cut again in some years.
Q.10. How were forests classified on the basis of the Forest Act,
1878?
Ans. Classification of forests on the basis of Act of 1878:
(i) Reserved forests: The best forests were called Reserved forests. Villagers
could not take anything from these forests.
(ii) Protected forests: They were also protected by the villagers but they
could collect wood from the Protected forests.
(iii) Village forests: They were located near the villages and could be
exploited by the villagers but not for commercial purposes.
Q.11. How did hunting become a big sport for the Indian people?
Ans. (i) In India, hunting of tigers and other animals had been part of the
culture of the court and nobility from centuries.
(ii) Many Mughal paintings show princes and emperors enjoying their hunt.
(iii) Under colonial rule, the scale of hunting increased to such an extent that
various species became almost extinct.
Q.12. In what ways did the British regulate forest trade?
Ans. (i) The British government gave many large European trading firms the
sole right to trade in the forest products of particular areas.
(ii) Grazing and hunting by the local people were restricted.
(iii) In this process, many pastoralists and nomadic communities lost their
livelihoods. Some of them were forced to work in factories, mines and
plantations in order to restrict them from entering into forest trade.

Q.13. How did Indian labour suffer at the British hands in the
plantations?
Ans. (i) In Assam, both men and women from forest communities like
Santhals and Gonds were recruited to work on tea plantations.
(ii) Their wages were low and conditions of work were very bad, rough and
tough.
(iii) They could not return easily to their home villages, as they were kept as
bonded labourers who were tied to their landlords.
Q.14. What were the main causes of the revolt of Bastar?
Ans. ● In 1905, the British put a stop on shifting cultivation, hunting and
collection of forest produce, which affected the people of Bastar.
● Some of the villagers were allowed to stay in the Reserved forests on the
condition that they would cut and transport trees and protect the forests
from fire for forest department for free.
● People of other villages were displaced without any notice or
compensation.
● Villagers had been suffering from increased land rents and demand for free
labour by British officials.
● The problems were added by the terrible famines of 1899-1900 and 190708.
● These conditions thus led to a revolt by the people of Bastar.
Q.15. How did the British suppress the revolt of Bastar?
Ans. ● The British sent troops to suppress the rebellion.
● The adivasi leaders tried to negotiate but the British surrounded their
camps and fired on them.
● Then they marched through the villages flogging and punishing those who
had taken part in the rebellion.
● Most villages were deserted as people fled into the jungle out of fear.
● The British could regain control over Bastar people in three months.
Q.16. Give a brief description about the woodcutter community of Java—the
Kalangs.
Ans. ● The Kalangs of Java were skilled forest cutters and they practised
shifting cultivation.

● They were so valuable that when the kingdom of Java split, the Kalang
families were equally divided between two kingdoms.
● Without them, it was difficult to harvest teak and build kings’ palaces.
● The Dutch tried to make the Kalangs work under them.
● In 1770, the Kalangs resisted by attacking a Dutch fort but they were
suppressed.
Q.17. How were forest laws enacted in Java?
Ans. (i) The Dutch enacted forest laws in Java to restrict villagers’ access to
forests.
(ii) Now wood cutting was done only for specific purposes like making boats,
constructing houses under close supervision, etc.
(iii) Villagers were punished for grazing cattle, transporting wood without a
permit or travelling through forests with horse carts or cattle.
Q.18. What was the Blandongdiensten system?
Ans. ● The Dutch first imposed rents on land being cultivated in the forest
and then exempted some villages from paying these rents, if they provided
free labour and buffaloes for cutting and transporting timber.
● This system was known as Blandongdiensten system.
● Later, instead of rent exemption forest villagers were given small wages,
but their right to cultivate forest land was restricted.
Q.19. What do you know about Samin’s challenge?
Ans. (i) Surontiko Samin of a teak forest village began questioning state
ownership of forests.
(ii) He argued that the state had not created the wind, water, earth and
wood, so it could not own it.
(iii) Soon, he organised a widespread movement with the support of his
sons-in-law and other families in his village.
Some Saminists protested by lying down on their land when the Dutch came
to survey it, while others refused to pay taxes or fines or perform labour.
Q.20. What was the effect of laying down of railway lines on forests?
Ans. (i) As early as the 1850s, in the Madras Presidency alone, 35,000 trees
were being cut annually for sleepers.

(ii) The government gave out contracts to individuals to supply the required
quantities.
(iii) These contractors began cutting trees indiscriminately. Forests around
the railway tracks started disappearing fast.
Q.21. Why did the British appoint the first Inspector General of
Forests in India?
Ans. ● British needed forests in order to build ships and railways.
● They were worried that the use of forests by local people and the reckless
felling of trees by traders would destroy forests.
● So, they decided to invite a German expert, Dietrich Brandis, for advice
and made him the first Inspector General of Forests in India.
Q.22. How forest dwellers’ lives changed after new forest laws were
imposed?
Ans. ● The new forest laws changed the lives of forest dwellers in yet
another way.
● Before the forest laws, many people who lived in or near forests had
survived by hunting deer, partridges and a variety of small animals.
● This customary practice was prohibited by the forest laws. Those who were
caught hunting were now punished for poaching.
Q.23. How were people benefitted with the trade in forest products?
Ans. (i) Many communities left their traditional occupations and started
trading in forest products.
(ii) This happened not only in India but across the world. For example, with
the growing demand for rubber in the mid-19th century, the Mundurucu
people of Brazilian Amazon who lived in villages on high ground, began to
collect latex from wild rubber trees for supplying to traders.
(iii) Gradually, they descended to live in trading ports and became
completely dependent on traders.
Q.24. Where is Bastar located?
Ans. (i) Bastar is located in the southernmost part of Chhattisgarh and
borders Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Maharashtra.
(ii) The central part of Bastar is on a plateau.

(iii) To the north of this plateau is the Chhattisgarh plain and to its south is
the Godavari plain.
The river Indrawati winds across Bastar east to west.
Q.25. Explain some of the common customs and beliefs of the Bastar
people.
Ans. Common customs and beliefs of the Bastar people
(i) Believed that land is given by mother earth.
(ii) Respect shown to the spirits of river, forest and mountain.
(iii) All natural resources to be looked after
(iv) Anyone seen cutting forests has to pay a fee.

