Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. Who were ‘liberals’?
Ans. Liberals were a group of people who wanted a nation which tolerates all
religions. They also opposed the uncontrolled power of dynastic rulers.
Q.2. Who were called ‘radicals’?
Ans. Radicals were the ones, who wanted a nation in which government was
based on the majority of a country’s population. They opposed the privileges
of great landowners and wealthy factory owners.
Q.3. What were the ideals of ‘Conservatives’?
Ans. They were opposed to radicals and liberals. They believed that the past
had to be respected and change had to be brought about through a slow
process.
Q.4. Give one characteristic of a socialist.
Ans. Socialists are against private property and saw it as the root of all social
ills of the time.
Q.5. Who was Robert Owen?
Ans. Robert Owen was a leading English manufacturer who sought to build a
cooperative community called New Harmony in Indiana (USA).
Q.6. Name two famous socialists who introduced a communist
system.
Ans. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels.
Q.7. What was a communist society according to Karl Marx?
Ans. Marx believed that to free themselves from capitalist exploitation,
workers had to construct a radically socialist society where all property was
socially controlled.
Q.8. Name the socialist international body which coordinated their
efforts.
Ans. The Second International
Q.9. What is ‘Russian Revolution’?

Ans. The fall of monarchy in February 1917 and the events of October are
normally called the Russian Revolution.
Q.10. Which territories were included in Russian Empire?
Ans. Russian Empire included current day Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia,
parts of Poland, Ukraine and Belarus. It also included today’s central Asian
states as Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Q.11. Name the socialist party formed in Russia in 1898 on Marx’s
ideas.
Ans. The Russian Social Democratic Workers Party.
Q.12. What role was played by ‘The Socialist Revolutionary Party’ in
1900 Russia?
Ans. This party struggled for peasants’ rights and demanded that land
belonging to nobles be transferred to peasants.
Q.13. What was the demand of workers of St. Petersberg in 1904?
Ans. The workers went on a strike demanding a reduction in the working day
to eight hours, an increase in wages and improvement in working conditions.
Q.14. Which incident was the immediate cause of 1905 Revolution in
Russia?
Ans. ‘Bloody Sunday’ was the incident, where over 100 workers were killed
and above 300 wounded on a Sunday.
Q.15. What was a ‘Duma’?
Ans. ‘Duma’ was a Parliament of elected consultative formed with the
permission of Tsar after the success of 1905 Russian Revolution.
Q.16. Name the leader who led procession of workers to winter
palace.
Ans. Father Gapon.
Q.17. Name the countries that formed allied Powers in World War I.
Ans. France, Britain and Russia. Later, Italy and Romania too joined them.
Q.18. Which countries formed central Powers bloc during World War
I?
Ans. Germany, Austria, Hungary and Turkey.
Q.19. What was ‘Soviet’?

Ans. ‘Soviet’ was a council of soldiers and striking workers of Russia.
Q.20. What was ‘Petrograd Soviet’?
Ans. When Soviet met in the same building where ‘Duma’ met, it was named
as ‘Petrograd Soviet’.
Q.21. What was the result of February Revolution of 1917 in Russia?
Ans. It brought down monarchy and Duma leaders and soviet leaders formed
a provisional government.
Q.22. What was Lenin’s ‘April Theses’?
Ans. The three demands of Lenin were called ‘April Thesis’. They were to be
closed, land to the tillers and banks to be nationalised.
Q.23. What new name was given to ‘Bolshevik Party’?
Ans. ‘The Communist Party’
Q.24. Who was the Prime Minister of Russia when October
Revolution began?
Ans. Kerenskii.
Q.25. Which secret police was formed to punish the one who
criticised Bolsheviks?
Ans. The secret police called ‘Cheka’ first and later OGPU and NKVD.
Q.26. What was Centralised Planning?
Ans. A process of centralised planning was introduced by Bolsheviks. In it
the officials assessed how the economy could work and set targets for a five
year period called ‘Five Year Plans’.
Q.27. Who was Stalin?
Ans. Stalin was a close associate of Lenin and came to power in Russia after
Lenin’s death. He introduced firm emergency measures.
Q.28. Who were ‘kulaks’?
Ans. It was the name given to the well-to-do peasants of Russia.
Q.29. Why Kulaks needed to be eliminated?
Ans. To develop modern forms and run them along industrial lives with
machinery, it was necessary to eliminate Kulaks, take away land from
peasants and establish state controlled large farms.

Q.30. What does ‘Kolkhoz’ mean?
Ans. These were collective farms. Peasants worked on this land and the
profit is shared amongst them. Those who resisted collectivisation were
severely punished.
Q.31. What is Comintern?
Ans. It is Communist International, a union of pro—Bolshevik Socialist
parties.

