Long Answer Questions

Q.1. How do Gujjar Bakarwals spend their life on the mountains of
Jammu and Kashmir?
OR
Why did pastoral nomads of Jammu and Kashmir migrate?
Ans. (i) By the end of April, they began their northern march for their
summer grazing grounds. Poor pastoralists who depended only on their
livestock did not have resources to tide over bad times. In times of war and
famine, they lost nearly everything.
(ii) They had to go looking for work in towns.
(iii) Some managed a living by working as charcoal burners or by doing
other odd jobs. The lucky ones got more regular work in road or building
construction.
(iv) Several households came together for this journey, forming what is
known as Kafila. They crossed the Pir Panjal passes and entered the valley of
Kashmir.
(v) They are great herders of goat and sheep. Many of them have migrated
to this region while searching for greener pastures.
(vi) Gradually, they have established themselves in the area and moved
annually between their summer and winter grazing grounds.
(vii) In winter, when the high mountains were covered with snow, they lived
with their herds in the low hills of the Shiwalik range.
(viii) By the end of April, they move upwards for their summer pastures. In
summer, these mountains were lush green with a variety of grasses that
provided nutritious forage for the animal herds.
Q.2. Discuss how the life of pastoralists changed dramatically under
the colonial rule.
Ans. (i) The colonisers wanted to transform all grazing lands into cultivated
farms. Land revenue was one of the main sources of income for them. By
expanding cultivation, it could increase the revenue collection. To the colonial
people, all uncultivated land appeared to be unproductive.

(ii) Through Forest Acts, some forests which produced commercially valuable
timber like deodar or sal, were declared ‘Reserved’. No pastoralist was
allowed to enter these forests. The colonisers believed that grazing
destroyed the saplings and young shoots of trees that germinated on the
forest floor.
(iii) The colonisers wanted nomadic tribes to live in villages, in fixed places
with fixed rights. Those who were settled were seen as peaceable and law
abiding.
(iv) Pastoralists had to pay tax on every animal they grazed on the pastures.
In most pastoral tracts of India, grazing tax was introduced in the mid-19th
century. This tax per head of cattle went up rapidly and the system of
collection was made more efficient.
Q.3. How did the British carry out the administration of the
Maasais?
Ans. (i) The British appointed chiefs of different sub-groups of the Maasais,
who were made responsible for the affairs of the tribe.
(ii) They imposed restrictions on raiding and warfare, thereby restricting the
authority of elders and warriors.
(iii) The chiefs, often collected wealth over time. They had a regular income
with which they could buy animals, goods and land.
(iv) They lent money to poor neighbours who needed cash to pay taxes.
Many of them began to live in towns as traders.
(v) Their wives and children stayed back in the villages to look after the
animals.
(vi) These chiefs managed to survive the devastations of war and drought.
They had now both pastoral and non-pastoral income, and could buy animals
when their stock was depleted.
Q.4. In what ways was cultivation practised in Maharashtra by
Dhangars?
OR
What lifestyle did the Dhangars—the pastoral community of
Maharashtra—follow?
Ans. (i) They stayed in the central plateau of Maharashtra during the
monsoon.

(ii) During monsoons, this tract became a vast grazing ground for the
Dhangar flocks.
(iii) Since the land is semi-arid with low rainfall, nothing but dry crops like
bajra could be sown here.
(iv) By October, the Dhangars harvested their bajra and moved westward.
After a march of about a month, they reached the Konkan.
(v) This was a flourishing agricultural tract with high rainfall and rich soil.
Here, the shepherds were welcomed by the Konkani peasants.
(vi) After the kharif harvest was out at this time, the fields had to be
fertilised and made ready for the rabi harvest.
(vii) Dhangar flocks manured the fields and fed on stubble. The Konkani
peasants also gave supplies of rice which the shepherds took back to the
plateau where grain was scarce.
(viii) With the onset of monsoon, the Dhangars left the Konkan and the
coastal areas with other flocks and returned to their settlements on the dry
plateau.
Q.5. How did Raikas of Rajasthan practise cattle rearing?
OR
Who are pastoral nomads ? Explain the life style and occupational
activities of pastoral nomads of deserts of Rajasthan.
Ans. (i) They are groups of people.
(ii) In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas.
(iii) The rainfall in the region is less and uncertain. On cultivated land,
harvest fluctuated every year. Over vast stretches, no crop could be grown.
(iv) So the Raikas combined cultivation with pastoralism.
(v) During the monsoon, the Raikas of Barmer, Jaisalmer, Jodhpur and
Bikaner stayed in their home villages, where pasture was available.
(vi) By October, when grazing grounds were dry and exhausted, they moved
out in search of other pastures and water, and returned again during the
next monsoon.
(vii) One group of Raikas—known as Maru Raikas—herded camels and
another group reared sheep and goat.
OR

(i) They are groups of people on the move with their herds of goats and
sheep or camels or cattle.
(ii) Pastoral Nomads of Desert of Rajasthan:
a. They are called Raikas.
b. Raikas combined cultivation with pastoralisms.
c. During monsoons Raikas of Barmer, Jaisalmer stayed in their home
villages where pastures were available.
d. By October, they move out in search of other pastures and return again
during the next monsoon.
Q.6. Which factors affected the lives of pastoral groups of
Rajasthan?
Ans. Life of pastoral group of Rajasthan was affected by a number of factors.
(i) They needed to calculate the timings of their movements, and ensure
that they could move through different territories.
(ii) They had to set up relationship with farmers on the way, so that the
herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the soil.
(iii) They combined a range of different activities—cultivation, trade and
herding—to make their living.
Q.7. Discuss why the colonial government in India brought Forest
Acts.
Ans. (i) By the mid-19th century, various Forests Acts were also being
enacted in the different provinces.
(ii) Through these Acts, some forests which produced commercially valuable
timber like deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’.
(iii) No pastoralist was allowed to access these forests.
(iv) Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’. In these, customary grazing
rights of pastoralists were granted but their movement was severely
restricted.
(v) The colonial officials believed that grazing destroyed the saplings and
young shoots of trees that germinated on the forest floor.
(vi) The herds trampled over the saplings and ate away the shoots. This
prevented new trees from growing.
Q.8. What do you know about pastoralists communities of Africa?

Ans. (i) In Africa, where over half of the world’s pastoral population lives,
even today 22 million Africans depend on some forms of pastoral activity for
their livelihood.
(ii) They include communities like Bedouins, Berbers, Maasai, Somali, Boran
and Turkana.
(iii) Most of them now live in the semi-arid grasslands or arid deserts where
rainfed agriculture is difficult.
(iv) They raise cattle, camels, goats, sheep and donkeys; and they sell milk,
meat, animal skin and wool.
(v) Some of them also earn through trade and transport, others combine
pastoral activity with agriculture, still others do a variety of odd jobs to
supplement their meagre and uncertain earnings from pastoralism.
Q.9. Who were Maasais?
Ans. The title Maasai derives from the word ‘Maa’. ‘Ma-Sai’ means ‘My
People’.
The Maasais are traditionally nomadic and pastoral people who depend on
milk and meat for subsistence.
High temperatures combine with low rainfall to create conditions which are
dry, dusty and extremely hot.
Drought conditions are common in this semi-arid land of equatorial heat.
During such times pastoral animals die in large numbers.
Q.10. Which similarities are observed in the lifestyles of the
Pastoralists of Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh? Describe.
Ans. (i) Gujjar Bakarwals of J & K are great herders of goat and sheep. They
established and moved annually between their summer and winter grazing
grounds.
(ii) In winter, high mountains covered with snow, they lived in shiwalik
range.
(iii)In summer, they begin northern march for the grazing grounds in the
valleys of Kashmir. They go in groups called as ‘kafila’.
(iv) Gaddi shepherds of Himachal Pradesh have a similar cyclic movement.
They too spend the winters in shiwaliks – grazing – in scrub forest.
(v) By April they move north and spend summer in Lahul and Spiti.

(vi) When snow melts, many move to high ground.

