Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. When was the Bastille Prison stormed?
Ans. Bastille Prison was broken by revolutionaries on the morning of 14th
July, 1789.
Q.2. Why was Bastille Prison attacked?
Ans. The Bastille prison was attacked with a hope to find hoarded
ammunition for the revolution.
Q.3. Which ruler came to power in France in 1774?
Ans. Louis XVI of Bourbon family.
Q.4. Whom did Louis XVI get married to?
Ans. Princess Marie Antoinette of Austria.
Q.5. Why was treasury empty when Louis XVI ascended the throne?
Ans. Long years of war had drained the financial resources of France and
along with it was the cost of maintaining an extravagant court at immense
palace of Versailles.
Q.6. Why did the French government increase the taxes?
Ans. To meet its regular expenses, such as the cost of maintaining an army,
the court, running government offices or universities, the state was forced to
increase the taxes.
Q.7. Who formed the First and Second Estates of French Society?
Ans. The clergy and the nobility were the members of the first and second
estate respectively.
Q.8. What does ‘subsistence crisis’ mean?
Ans. It is an extreme situation where the basic means of livelihood were
endangered.
Q.9. What were the views of John Locke in inspiring the people for
French Revolution?
Ans. Locke sought to refute the doctrine of the divine and absolute right of
the monarch in his book ‘Two Treatises of Government’.
Q.10. What was the Estates General?

Ans. The Estates General was a political body to which the three estates
sent their representatives.
Q.11. What was the immediate cause of French Revolution?
Ans. Due to bad harvest, the prices of bread rose and often bakers hoarded
the bread. The angry women who could not get bread after long hours in the
queues stormed into the shops.
Q.12. When was the draft of the National Assembly’s constitution
completed and what was its main objective?
Ans. The draft of the constitution was completed in 1791 and its main
objective was to limit the powers of the monarch.
Q.13. Who all got the right to vote for National Assembly?
Ans. Only men above 25 years of age, who paid taxes equal to at least 3
days of a labourers’ wage were given the status of active citizen and the
right to vote.
Q.14. Who could qualify as an Elector?
Ans. To qualify as an elector and then as a member of the Assembly, a man
had to belong to the highest bracket of taxpayers.
Q.15. What was ‘Marseillaise’?
Ans. It was a patriotic song sung by volunteers of Marseilles as they
marched into Paris. Marseillaise is now the national anthem of France.
Q.16. What were political clubs?
Ans. Political clubs were formed by people to discuss government policies
and plan their own forms of action. Women too formed such clubs.
Q.17. Who was the leader of Jacobin club?
Ans. Maximilian Robespierre.
Q.18. Who were ‘Sans–Culottes’?
Ans. They were the common lower class working people in late 18th century,
who wore long trousers rather than the knee breaches, favoured by the
aristocracy. They wore red caps to symbolise liberty.
Q.19. Which new Assembly was formed by Jacobins?
Ans. Jacobins elected new assembly which was called convention.
Q.20. Who introduced ‘Reign of terror’ in France?

Ans. Maximilian Robespierre introduced ‘Reign of Terror’ when he followed a
policy of severe control and punishment in France.
Q.21. What was ‘Directory’?
Ans. ‘Directory’ was an executive made up of five members. They were
appointed by two elected legislative councils.
Q.22. Name the important political clubs formed by women in France
to fight for their political rights.
Ans. The society of Revolutionary and The Republican Women.
Q.23. When did women finally get the right to vote in France?
Ans. 1946.
Q.24. Between which three continents triangular slave trade was
held?
Ans. The triangular slave trade was held between Europe, Africa and
America.
Q.25. When was slavery finally abolished in French colonies?
Ans. Slavery was finally abolished in French colonies in 1848.
Q.26. When did Napoleon Bonaparte became Emperor of France?
Ans. In 1804, Napoleon Bonaparte crowned himself as an Emperor of France.
Q.27. In which famous war was Napoleon Bonaparte defeated?
Ans. Napoleon was finally defeated at ‘Battle of Waterloo’ in 1815.
Q.28. What was the most important legacy of the French
Revolution?
Ans. The ideas of liberty and democratic rights were the most important
legacy of the French Revolution.

