Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. Who was Hitler’s propoganda Minister?
Ans. Goebbels.
Q.2. How Hitler’s end came?
Ans. Hitler, his Propoganda Minister Goebbels and his entire family
committed suicide collectively in his Berlin bunker on 30 April, 1945.
Q.3. What was Nazism?
Ans. It was a system introduced by Hitler, which had a structure of ideas
about the world and politics.
Q.4. Which tribunal was set up after world war II to punish the Nazis
for their crime against humanity?
Ans. International Military Tribunal
Q.5. What was ‘Genocidal war’?
Ans. It was a war which resulted in the mass murder of selected groups of
innocent civilians of Europe.
Q.6. Name the peace treaty signed after World War–I.
Ans. It was called ‘Treaty of Versailles’.
Q.7. Who were called ‘November Criminals’?
Ans. Those who supported the Weimer Republic mainly Socialists, Catholics
and Democrats were mockingly called the ‘November Criminals’.
Q.8. What happened when Germany refused to pay war reparation
to France?
Ans. In 1923, Germany refused to pay. The French occupied its leading
industrial area, Ruhr, to claim their coal.
Q.9. Why the value of German currency ‘mark’ fell?
Ans. When French occupied Ruhr area, Germany retaliated with passive
resistance and printed paper currency recklessly. With too much printed
money in circulation, the value of the German mark fell.
Q.10. What does ‘Hyperinflation’ mean?

Ans. It’s a situation when prices rise phenomenally high.
Q.11. What was ‘Article 48’ of Weimer Republic?
Ans. It gave the President the powers to impose emergency, suspend civil
rights and rule by decree.
Q.12. Who was Hitler?
Ans. Hitler was born in 1889 in Austria, spent his youth in poverty. When the
World War I broke out, he enrolled for army, acted as a messenger in the
front, became a corporal and earned medals for bravery.
Q.13. Under which situation, Nazi Propaganda was appreciated?
Ans. After 1929, banks collapsed and businesses shut down, workers lost
their jobs and the middle classes were threatened with destitution. In such a
situation Nazi propaganda won people’s hearts.
Q.14. What promise was made by Hitler to the people as a leader of
Germany?
Ans. He promised to build a strong nation, undo the injustices of the Treaty
of Versailles and restore the dignity of the German people.
Q.15. How Nazis projected Hitler?
Ans. Nazi propoganda skilfully projected Hitler as a messiah, a saviour, as
someone who had arrived to relieve people from their distress.
Q.16. How Hitler started dismantling democratic rule in Germany?
Ans. A mysterious fire that broke out in the German Parliament building in
February facilitated the move of Hitler.
Q.17. What did ‘The fire Decree’ imply?
Ans. Fire Decree of 28th February, 1933 indefinitely suspened civic rights
like freedom of speech, press and assembly that had been guaranteed by the
Weimer Constitution.
Q.18. What was ‘Concentration Camp’?
Ans. It was a camp where people were isolated and detained without due
process of law. Typically, it was surrounded by electrified barbed wire fences.
Q.19. What was ‘Enabling Act’?
Ans. This Act established dictatorship in Germany. It gave Hitler all the
powers to sideline Parliament and rule by decree. All political parties and
trade unions were banned except for the Nazi Party and its affiliates.

Q.20. Which Security forces were created by Nazis to control order
in society?
Ans. Besides Regular police in green uniform, there was Gestapo (Secret
State Police) the SS (the protection squads), Criminal Police and Security
Service.
Q.21. Which famous economist was appointed by Hitler for economic
recovery of Germany?
Ans. Economist Hjalmar Schacht was appointed, who aimed at full
production and full employment through a state funded work-creation
programme.
Q.22. What was the immediate cause of World War II?
Ans. In September 1939, Germany invaded Poland. This became the
immediate cause of World War II.
Q.23. Among which three countries ‘Tripartite Pact’ was signed?
Ans. In September 1940, a tripartite pact was signed between Germany,
Italy and Japan.
Q.24. When did US enter the World War II?
Ans. When Japan extended its support to Hitler and bombed the US base at
Pearl Harbor, the US entered into World War II.
Q.25. Who were considered ‘undesirable’ by Hitler?
Ans. Jews, Gypsies and blacks living in Nazi Germany were considered as
inferior races, who threatened the biological purity of ‘Superior Aryan’ race,
and were called undesirable by Hitler.
Q.26. Why Jews were the worst sufferers in Nazi Germany?
Ans. Nazis felt that Jews were killers of Christ and were also considered
killers of US usurers (Moneylenders).
Q.27. How schools in Nazi Germany were ‘cleansed’ and ‘purified’?
Ans. Teachers who were Jews or seen as ‘politically unreliable’ were
dismissed. Children were segregated as Germans and Jews could not sit
together or play.
Q.28. What was ‘Jungvolk’?
Ans. These were Nazi youth groups for children below 14 years of age.
Q.29. What were the ‘gas chambers’ called?

Ans. Gas chambers were called ‘disinfection areas’ and looked like
bathrooms equipped with fake shower heads.
Q.30. Which was the most in famous film in which orthodox Jews
were stereotyped and marked?
Ans. The film was ‘The Eternal Jew’.
Q.31. Who wrote the book ‘Third Reich of Dreams’?
Ans. It was written by Charlotte Beradt.
Q.32. What was ‘Holocaust’?
Ans. The Jews wanted the world to remember the atrocities and sufferings
they had endured during the Nazi killing operations.
Q.33. How do we come to know about Holocaust today?
Ans. Memory of Holocaust is in memoirs, fiction, documentaries, poetry,
memorials and museums in many parts of the world today.

