Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. What is meant by ‘deforestation’?
Ans. Cutting down of forests is referred to as deforestation.
Q.2. Which commercial crops were grown by British after
deforestation?
Ans. Jute, sugar, wheat and cotton were the commercial crops grown by the
British in India to feed the growing population of Europe.
Q.3. Why were forests considered unproductive by the British?
Ans. They considered them to be wild and wasteful. Needed to be brought
under cultivation so that the land could yield agricultural products and
reverse and enhance the income of the state.
Q.4. How spread of railways created a new demand for timber?
Ans. To run locomotives, wood was needed as fuel and to lay railway lines,
sleepers were essential to hold the tracks together. Also, wood was used in
the interior of the railway coaches.
Q.5. Who was the first Inspector General of Forests in India?
Ans. A German Forest Expert, Dietrich Brandis was the first Inspector
General of Forests in India.
Q.6. Name the forest Institute of Dehradun set up in 1906 by
Brandis.
Ans. The Imperial Forest Research Institute.
Q.7. Name the three categories of forests as mentioned in the Act of
1878.
Ans. Reserved, Protected and Village Forests.
Q.8. Which species of trees were promoted for the building of ships
or railways?
Ans. Teak and Sal species were promoted for the building of ships or
railways.
Q.9. From which fruit was oil extracted for cooking and lighting
lamps?

Ans. Fruit of the Mahua tree.
Q.10. What was the use of a dried scooped-out gourd?
Ans. It was used as portable water bottle.
Q.11. How many tigers were killed by British administrator George
Yule?
Ans. George Yule killed 400 tigers.
Q.12. What kind of products did nomadic communities of India like
Banjaras trade in?
Ans. Elephants, hides, horns, silk cocoons, ivory, bamboo, spices, fibres,
grasses, gums and resins, etc., were the products traded by Banjara
communities.
Q.13. What were ‘Criminal tribes’ forced to do by the British?
Ans. They were forced to work instead in factories, mines and plantations
under British supervision.
Q.14. Which tribes of India were recruited to work on tea
plantations?
Ans. ‘Santhals and Oraons’ from Jharkhand and ‘Gonds’ from Chhattisgarh
were recruited to work on tea plantations.
Q.15. Name the river which flows across Bastar from east to west.
Ans. River Indrawati.
Q.16. Name the communities living in Bastar.
Ans. Maria and Muria Gonds, Dhurwas, Bhatsas and Halbas are the
communities living in Bastar.
Q.17. Where is Bastar located?
Ans. Bastar is located in the southernmost part of Chhattisgarh and it
borders Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Maharashtra.
Q.18. Name the leader who rebelled against the British.
Ans. Gunda Dhur from village Nethanar.
Q.19. Where is Java located?
Ans. Java is a rice – producing island in Indonesia.
Q.20. Which colonial power ruled over Indonesia?

Ans. The Dutch from Belgium.
Q.21. Which community of Java were skilled forest cutters and
shifting cultivators?
Ans. Kalangs of Java.
Q.22. Who was Swrontiko Samin?
Ans. He was from Randublatung village of Java, who began questioning state
ownership of the forests.
Q.23. What was ‘A Scorched Earth Policy’?
Ans. Destroying of Sawmills and burning huge piles of giant teak logs.

