NCERT Solutions Class 8 History Our Pasts III Chapter 1 – Download Free PDF
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 1 – How, When and Where contains the solutions to the exercises given in the History book – Our Pasts-III. NCERT Solutions of the exercises are provided, which will be useful for school exams as they are sourced from the NCERT textbooks. The NCERT Solutions are easy and accurate, which will align the school students’ preparation with the questions asked in the examinations.
To make learning easy and fun, the solutions here are created in an interesting manner to help students grasp the concepts easily. All the textbook questions are answered with the utmost care. Students can refer to these NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History and have a better understanding of the concepts.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History (Our Pasts-III) Chapter 1 How, When and Where:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 1
The Solutions for Chapter 1, How, When and Where are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 8 for other subjects.
1. State whether true or false:
(a) James Mill divided Indian history into three periods – Hindu, Muslim, Christian. 
(b) Official documents help us understand what the people of the country think.
(c) The British thought surveys were important for effective administration.
Answer.
(a) False
(b) False
(c) True
2. What is the problem with the periodisation of Indian history that James Mill offers? 
Answer. 
The problem with the periodisation of Indian History that James Mill offers is the superiority of British shown over Hindu and Muslim. James Mill has put Indian History into three periods – Hindu, Muslim and British, claiming that it was necessary to introduce European manners, arts, institutions and laws in India.
James Mill’s views have several defects given below:
a. He thought that all Asian societies were at a lower level of civilisation when compared to Europe.
b. According to his telling of history, before the British came to India, Hindu and Muslim despots ruled the country.
c. Religious intolerance, caste taboos and superstitious practices dominated social life before the British came to India
3. Why did the British preserve official documents?
Answer.
British had preserved official documents because they thought if they write and record everything, it will later be easier for them to study them and debate. They kept official records of what they thought was right, so that in the future, those records can serve as proofs of all the decisions that they had taken.
4. How will the information historians get from old newspapers be different from that found in police reports? 
Answer.
The nature of information that the historians get from old newspapers and police reports can be entirely different. Typically, a historian would collect information from a wide variety of sources that includes both official and unofficial documents. The police report comes from an administrative viewpoint, and the types of details that we can obtain from them are often restricted.
A police report is strictly confined to the procedures and is concerned with record-keeping, rather than building a narrative. Journalism and reporting tools follow a different approach that might bring out the finer details about an event or a happening. Often police reports might oversee or neglect information that does not directly serve the function of law enforcement.
Being a mass media, newspapers provide more backdrop, context and elaborate descriptions. But the relative merits and accuracy of a piece of information from any source can only be determined after proper research and investigation. For getting a balanced and clearer picture of a period in history, historians often go through as many sources as possible, while keeping in mind the biases and interests that could be behind them.
How, When and Where Summary
The NCERT Class 8 Our Pasts-III Chapter 1 talks about the following topics:
Our Pasts-III is an important book for Class 8 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, students can access the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Social Science from the links given. Students are advised to practice all the questions on a regular basis which yields good results in the main examinations.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 1Why did the British preserve official documents as explained in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?The British had preserved official documents because they thought if they write and record everything, it will later be easier for them to study it and debate. They kept official records of what they thought was right so that in the future, those records can serve as proof of all the decisions that they had taken. To learn the correct answers according to the latest CBSE guidelines for the textbook questions, students should refer to the NCERT Solutions of BYJU’S.What are the topics students will learn from Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?The topics that students will learn from Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History are –
1. How important are the dates?
(a) Which dates?
(b) How do we periodise?
(c) What is colonial?
2. How do We Know?
(a) Administration produces records
(b) Surveys become important
(c) What official records do not tellWhat are the salient features of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 1?The salient features of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 1 are:
1. The solutions are concept-oriented to enhance conceptual knowledge of the students.
2. NCERT Solutions are created by subject matter experts with maximum attention.
3. The answers are presented in a stepwise manner for easy understanding and for students to fetch more marks.
4. PDF format solutions are available with a free download option.
5. Effective and efficient study guide that students can rely on.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 1
Why did the British preserve official documents as explained in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?
What are the topics students will learn from Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?
What are the salient features of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 1?
