NCERT Solutions Class 8 Social Science History Our Pasts III Chapter 2 – Get Free PDF
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 2 – From Trade to Territory The Company Establishes Power includes solutions to the exercises given in the History book – ‘Our Pasts-III’. There are solutions for NCERT exercises, which are useful for school exams, as they are obtained from NCERT textbooks. NCERT Solutions are simple and accurate, which equips the school student’s preparation with the questions asked in the exams.
Subject experts have designed the answers in an understandable manner so that students can grasp the topics easily. Using NCERT Solutions, students can practice a wide variety of questions from the textbook. Students can start practicing offline to yield good results in the board exams by downloading the pdf of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History, from the links that are provided.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History (Our Pasts-III) Chapter 2 From Trade to Territory The Company Establishes Power:- Download PDF here
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 2 – From Trade to Territory The Company Establishes Power
The solutions for chapter 2 of ‘Our Pasts-III’ are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 8 for other subjects.
1. Match the following: 
Answer.
2. Fill in the blanks: 
(a) The British conquest of Bengal began with the Battle of ___________. 
(b) Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan were the rulers of ___________. 
(c) Dalhousie implemented the Doctrine of ___________. 
(d) Maratha kingdoms were located mainly in the ___________ part of India. 
Answer.
(a) The British conquest of Bengal began with the Battle of Plassey
(b) Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan were the rulers of Mysore.
(c) Dalhousie implemented the Doctrine of Lapse
(d) Maratha kingdoms were located mainly in the South-western part of India.
3. State whether true or false:
(a) The Mughal empire became stronger in the eighteenth century. 
(b) The English East India Company was the only European company that traded with India. 
(c) Maharaja Ranjit Singh was the ruler of Punjab. 
(d) The British did not introduce administrative changes in the territories they conquered. 
Answer.
(a) The Mughal empire became stronger in the eighteenth century – False
(b) The English East India Company was the only European company that traded with India – False
(c) Maharaja Ranjit Singh was the ruler of Punjab – True
(d) The British did not introduce administrative changes in the territories they conquered – False
4. What attracted European trading companies to India?
Answer.
European trading companies were looking for new lands from which they could buy goods at a cheap price and carry them back to Europe to sell at higher prices. The fine qualities of cotton and silk produced in India had a big market in Europe. Spices like Pepper, cloves, cardamom and cinnamon too were in great demand. These were the reasons that attracted European trading companies to India.
5. What were the areas of conflict between the Bengal nawabs and the East India Company?
Answer.
After the first British factory was set up in 1651 on the banks of the river Hugli, East India company started allowing more of its merchants and traders to visit and settle down at the city of Bengal. The reasons that caused the conflicts between Bengal nawabs and East India Company were:
a. Nawabs denied concessions to the East India Company on many occasions
b. Nawabs also demanded large tributes from the company
c. The company denied paying taxes
d. The company officials wrote insulting letters to the nawabs
6. How did the assumption of Diwani benefit the East India Company?
Answer.
Diwani rights are the rights that the British acquired to collect their own revenues and have the authority to decide on civil cases. This right benefited East India Company in several ways:
a. It allowed the Company to use the vast revenue resources of Bengal
b. The monopoly of the East India Company on the trade started
c. Revenue of Bengal was used to export Indian goods out of the country
7. Explain the system of “subsidiary alliance”.
Answer.
The system of the subsidiary alliance made Indian rulers let go of their armed forces and come under the protection of East India Company. The following changes occurred when this system came into being:
a. East India Company became the guardian of the territories that it took under the alliance
b. An English resident, who served as the EIC’s personnel, was appointed in the territory to keep a check on the ruler
c. The Indian rules were asked not to allow any other European companies to trade with them and enter their territory
d. Indian rulers were told to pay for the subsidiary armed forces of the EIC, disobeying which led to that part of the territory being forfeited by the company
8. In what way was the administration of the Company different from that of Indian rulers? 
Answer.
The difference in the administration of the company and that of the Indian rulers is given below:
9. Describe the changes that occurred in the composition of the Company’s army.
Answer.
The army of EIC was known as Sepoy Army. The main participants of the army were the peasants of India, trained by the EIC to become professional soldiers. The major change in the EIC army was the domination of infantry over cavalry with the introduction of muskets, matchlocks to guard them. The company also introduced a uniform military culture where soldiers were given European training through drills and other exercises.
Chapter 2 – From Trade to Territory The Company Establishes Power Summary
Chapter 2 of ‘Our Pasts-III’ deals with the advent of European power in India. It talks about how the Mughal empire fell with the death of Aurangzeb and how the Nawabs started disintegrating with the Mughal empire. Students will also read about how East India Company got the royal charter to trade with India and how later, the Battle of Plassey and Buxar changed its role in Indian society. Starting with its establishment of the first factory in Hooghly river and with the introduction of land revenue systems such as Subsidiary Alliance, East India Company slowly and steadily started acquiring Indian territories.
Students should read the chapters under the following heads:
‘Our Pasts-III’ is an important book for Class 8 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, solutions for the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Social Science is provided in the links. Students can refer and download the solutions pdf for free from the links given and can start practicing offline to achieve their goals.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 2What are the reasons that caused the conflicts between Bengal nawabs and East India Company in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?The reasons that caused the conflicts between Bengal nawabs and East India Company were:
a) Nawabs denied concessions to the East India Company on many occasions
b) Nawabs also demanded large tributes from the company
c) The company officials wrote insulting letters to the nawabs
d) The company denied paying taxesWhat are the topics covered in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?The topics that are covered in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History are:
1) East India Company Comes East
a. East India Company begins trade in Bengal
b. How trade led to battles
c. The Battle of Plassey
d. Company officials become “Nabobs”
2) Company Rule Expands
a. Tipu Sultan – The “Tiger of Mysore”
b. War with the Marathas
c. The claim to paramountcy
d. The Doctrine of Lapse
3) Setting up a New Administration
a. The Company armyWhere can I find the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 2 PDF online?The NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 2 PDF can be found at BYJU’S website. Students can download it for free from the links provided on the web page at any time and anywhere. Individual subject-matter experts have created these solutions keeping in mind the understanding capabilities of Class 8 students. All the fundamentals are explained in detail using diagrams, charts and tables wherever possible to assist students with visual learning. All the answers are in accordance with the latest CBSE guidelines and marking schemes.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 2
What are the reasons that caused the conflicts between Bengal nawabs and East India Company in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?
What are the topics covered in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?
Where can I find the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 2 PDF online?
