NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 10
In this chapter, students will learn about Samudragupta, Harshavardhana and South Indian kingdoms – their conquests and achievements. The exercise contains 8 questions, and we have provided answers to all these in NCERT Solutions Class 6 History Chapter 10 “New Empires and Kingdoms”. These solutions are created after an in-depth analysis of syllabus and exam pattern. Answers are written in simple language so that it’s easy for students to understand. Studying these solutions will make their exam preparation simpler.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF below.
 NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (Our Pasts-I) Chapter 10 New Empires and Kingdoms:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science History Chapter 10- New Empires and Kingdoms
The Solutions for Chapter 10, New Empires and Kingdoms are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Let’s Recall Page No 112
1. State whether true or false:
(a) Harishena composed a prashasti in praise of Gautamiputra Shri Satakarni.
(b) The rulers of Aryavarta brought tribute for Samudragupta.
(c) There were twelve rulers in Dakshinapatha
(d) Taxila and Madurai were important centres under the control of the Gupta rulers.
(e) Aihole was the capital of the Pallavas.
(f) Local assemblies functioned for several centuries in south India.
Solution 1:
(a) Harishena composed a prashasti in praise of Gautamiputra Shri Satakarni. – False
(b) The rulers of Aryavarta brought tribute for Samudragupta.- False
(c) There were twelve rulers in Dakshinapatha – True
(d) Taxila and Madurai were important centres under the control of the Gupta rulers.- False
(e) Aihole was the capital of the Pallavas.- False
(f) Local assemblies functioned for several centuries in south India. – True
2. Mention 3 authors who wrote about Harshavardhana.
Solution 2:
The 3 authors were.
3. What changes do you find in the army of this time?
Solution 3:
Like earlier rulers, some of these kings maintained a well-organised army, with elephants, chariots, cavalry and foot soldiers. Besides, there were military leaders who provided the king with troops whenever they needed them. They were not paid regular salaries. Instead, some of them received grants of land. They collected revenue from the land and used this to maintain soldiers and horses, and provide equipment for warfare.
4. What were the new administrative arrangements in this period?
Solution 4:
5. What do you think Arvind would have to do if he was acting as Samudragupta?
Solution 5:
Give importance to science, astronomy, music and art.
6. Do you think ordinary people would have read and understood the prashastis? Give reasons for your answer.
Solution 6:
Ordinary people would not have read and understood the prashastis, since Sanskrit is not the language of ordinary people.
Let’s Do
7. If you had to make a genealogy for yourself, who are the people you would include in it? How many generations would you like to show? Make a chart and fill it.
Solution 7:
It is a class activity for the students.
8. How do you think wars affect the lives of ordinary people today?
Solution 8:
New Empires and Kingdoms Summary
The NCERT Class 6 History Our Pasts-I Chapter 10 talks about the following topics:
To get answers to History, Civics and Geography subject visit NCERT Solutions Class 6 Social Science pages at BYJU’S.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 10What are the topics discussed in Chapter 10 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The topics discussed in Chapter 10 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History are
Prashastis and what they tell us
Samudragupta’s Prashasti
Genealogies
Harshavardhana and Harshacharita
Pallavas, Chalukyas and Pulakeshin’s Prashasti
How were these kingdoms administered
A new kind of army
Assemblies in the Southern Kingdoms
Ordinary people in the KingdomsWhat are the types of questions present in Chapter 10 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?This chapter has a total of 8 questions. Most of the questions are short answers and long answers. Also, other types of questions like match the following and say True or False have been included. According to the latest CBSE marking schemes, individual subject experts at BYJU’S have curated the NCERT Solutions to help students secure the highest marks possible.Why should I prefer NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 10 over other resources?The NCERT Solutions have been designed by experts at BYJU’S to offer several benefits for the students preparing for their board exams. Every topic has been given an in-depth explanation to assist students in scoring high marks. All the solutions are strictly in accordance with the latest syllabus of the CBSE board. Apart from Class 6 examinations, these answers also help students build a strong foundation for various other competitive exams like UPSC.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 10
What are the topics discussed in Chapter 10 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
What are the types of questions present in Chapter 10 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
Why should I prefer NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 10 over other resources?
