NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 3
This chapter talks about the Harappa and Mohenjodaro civilisation, the location, the people and the advancements of this civilisation. NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 3 “In the Earliest Cities” contains the answers for the exercise questions. These answers are created by subject experts and cover all the important details, which will help students to score more marks. Studying through these solutions will provide more clarity on the topics discussed in this chapter.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF from the link provided below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (Our Pasts-I) Chapter 3 In the Earliest Cities:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science History Chapter 3- “In the Earliest Cities”
The solutions for Chapter 3, In the Earliest Cities are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Exercise Questions Page No 34
Let’s Recall
1. How do archaeologists know that cloth was used in the Harappan civilization?
 Solution 1:
Actual pieces of cloth were found attached to the lid of a silver vase and some copper objects at Mohenjodaro. Archaeologists have also found spindle whorls, made of terracotta and faience. These were used to spin thread.
2. Match the columns
Solution 2: 
3. Why were metals, writing, the wheel and the plough important for the Harappans?
 Solution 3:
Metals – used for making tools, ornaments, vessels, weapons
Writing – for communication purposes
Wheel – for pottery and for making carts used for travelling
Plough – used for farming purposes
Let’s Discuss
 4. Make a list of all the terracotta toys shown in the lesson. Which do you think children would have enjoyed playing the most?
 Solution 4:
5. Make a list of what the Harappans ate and put a tick mark against the things you eat today.
Solution 5:
We can find a list of 9 different items.
6. Do you think that the life of farmers and herders who supplied food to the Harappan cities was different from that of the farmers and herders you read about in Chapter 2? Give reasons for your answer.
Solution 6:
Irrigation – Earlier farmers and herders did not have access to irrigation facilities, unlike their later counterparts.
Storage – Earlier farmers used clay pots and baskets for storage purpose, whereas later stage farmers had well-built granaries.
Tools – Earlier farmers did not have wooden tools like ploughs that could be used for tilling the land.
In the Earliest Cities Summary
The NCERT Class 6 History Our Pasts-I Chapter 3 talks about the following topics:
Students can also check the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science to prepare effectively for the Social Science exam.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 3What are the topics discussed in Chapter 3 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The topics discussed in Chapter 3 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History are:
The story of Harappa
Houses, drains and streets of Harappa
Life in the city of Harappa
In search of raw materials
Food for people in the cities
A closer look at Harappan towns in Gujarat
The mystery of the endWhat are the types of questions present in Chapter 3 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?This chapter has a total of 6 questions. Most of the questions are short answers and long answers. Also, other types of questions like match the following and match the column have been included. According to the latest CBSE marking schemes, individual subject experts at BYJU’S have curated the NCERT Solutions to help students secure the highest marks possible.Why should I prefer NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 3 over other resources?The NCERT Solutions have been designed by experts at BYJU’S to offer several benefits for the students preparing for their board exams. Every topic has been given an in-depth explanation to assist students in scoring high marks. All the solutions are strictly in accordance with the latest syllabus of the CBSE board. Apart from Class 6 examinations, these answers also help students build a strong foundation for various other competitive exams like UPSC.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 3
What are the topics discussed in Chapter 3 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
What are the types of questions present in Chapter 3 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
Why should I prefer NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 3 over other resources?
