NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 4
In this chapter, students will learn about the Vedas, Megaliths and the Inamgaon. The exercise contains 2 questions under the ‘let’s recall’, 2 questions under ‘let’s discuss’ and 3 questions under ‘let’s do’ section. In the NCERT Solutions Class 6 History Chapter 4 “What Books and Burials Tell Us”, we have provided the answers to the let’s recall and let’s discuss section. Questions under let’s do section are for students as an extra activity and project, so that they can research further on the topic.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF from the link available below.
 NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (Our Pasts-I) Chapter 4 What Books and Burials Tell Us:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science History Chapter 4- “What Books and Burials Tell Us”
The solutions for Chapter 4, What Books and Burials Tell Us are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Exercise Questions Page No 44
Let’s Recall
1. Match the columns
 Solution 1:
 
2. Complete the sentences
(a) Slaves were used for work
(b) Megaliths are found in South India, Kashmir, North East
(c) Stone circles or boulders on the surface were used to point out the exact place of burial
(d) Port-holes were used for burying other members of the same family at the same place
(e) People at Inamgaon ate peas, pulses, rice, barley, sesame 
 Let’s Discuss
 3. In what ways are the books we read today different from the Rigveda?
Solution 3:
The books we use are written and printed. Rigveda was recited and heard rather than read. It was written down several centuries after it was first composed and printed less than 200 years ago.
 4. What kind of evidence from burials do archaeologists use to find out whether there were social differences amongst those who were buried?
Solution 4:
Archaeologists found that in some burials, skeletons found were buried with pots. The number of pots buried was more if the person had higher social status.
5. In what ways do you think that the life of a raja was different from that of a dasa or dasi?
Solution 5:
Raja had the highest social status, whereas dasa or dasi had the lowest social status. The latter were treated like slaves. They were captured from wars.
What Books and Burials Tell Us Summary
The NCERT Class 6 History Our Pasts-I Chapter 4 talks about the following topics:
To get the answers of the History, Geography, Civics subjects of Class 6, go through the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science.
 
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 4What will students learn from the Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The topics covered in the Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History are:
One of the oldest books in the world
How Historians study the Rigveda
Cattle, Horses and Chariots
Words to describe people
Silent sentinels – the story of the megaliths
Finding out about social differences
Were some burial spots meant for certain families
A special burial at Inamgaon
Occupations at InamgaonDoes the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 4 provide accurate and detailed solutions for the students?The NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 4 are developed by subject experts at BYJU’S. All concepts are devised interactively following extensive research according to the understanding abilities of Class 6 students. The answers are 100% accurate and precise as per the latest CBSE syllabus and guidelines. Neat presentation of the answers using bulletins, charts, and tables helps students remember and retain concepts effectively. Several shortcut tips and tricks are highlighted to boost the confidence of students for attempting the annual exams.In what ways are the books we read today different from the Rigveda discussed in Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The books we use are written and printed. Rigveda was recited and heard rather than read. It was written down several centuries after it was first composed and printed less than 200 years ago. Students can learn more about these topics using the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 4 from BYJU’S. They can also obtain a firm grip over the important topics of this chapter by referring to these solutions.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 4
What will students learn from the Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
Does the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 4 provide accurate and detailed solutions for the students?
In what ways are the books we read today different from the Rigveda discussed in Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
