NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 5
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 “Kingdoms, Kings and An Early Republic” will provide you the answers to the exercise provided at the end of the chapter. These solutions are useful for the Social Science exam preparation as questions are asked from the NCERT textbook. Referring to these answers will give you more clarity on how to express and represent answers during the exam.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF below.
 NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (History – Our Pasts – I) Chapter 5 Kingdoms, Kings and An Early Republic:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 – Kingdoms, Kings and An Early Republic
The Solutions for Chapter 5, Kingdoms, Kings and The Early Republic are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Q.1 State whether true or false:
Solution: 
(a) True
The Rajas who allowed the ashvameda horse to pass through their lands showed that they accepted the supremacy of the Raja performing the sacrifice. These Rajas were then invited to attend the sacrifice.
(b) False
The charioteer was the raja’s companion in the battlefield and bore witness to many of his deeds and exploits. Thus it was the charioteer who sang poems and recounted tales glorifying the deeds of the Raja and Priests performed the rituals including the sprinkling of sacred water on the king.
(c) False
It has been discovered by archaeologists that people lived in huts and kept cattle and other animals in the many settlements of the janapadas
(d) False
Plates and bowls are the most common vessels made out of Painted Grey Ware. These were used on special occasions, for important people, and to serve special food.
(e) True
Most mahajanapadas had a capital city, many of these were fortified.
Q.2 Fill in the chart given below with the terms: hunter-gatherers, farmers, traders, craftspersons, herders.

Solution: Farmers – Gave one-sixth of the produce to the state
Craftspersons- contributed to labour
Herder- contributed in the form of animal produce
Traders – stimulated commercial activity by buying and selling goods
Hunter-gatherers – would provide forest produce such as elephants, furs and other items as a tribute.
Q.3 Who were the groups who could not participate in the assemblies of the ganas?
Solution: 
The following groups couldn’t participate in the assemblies of the ganas:
1. Women
2. Dasas, the slaves
3. Kammakaras, the landless labourers
Q.4 Why did the rajas of mahajanapadas build forts?
Solution: The rajas of mahajanapadas built forts in order to defend their capital city from attacks by other rajas. It is also probable that they wanted to show how rich and powerful they were by building large and powerful walls. The more practical reason could be that it was more easy to govern fortified cities.
Q.5 In what ways are present-day elections different from the ways in which rulers were chosen in janapadas?
Solution: In janapadas, men became ‘rajas’ by performing the Ashvamedha sacrifice. The rajas who let the Ashvamedha horse pass through their lands meant that they accepted the supremacy of the raja who wanted to perform the sacrifice.
In modern times, leaders are elected through a democratic system. Every citizen who is 18 years or older has the right to cast his.her vote. The candidates who win the majority of votes become public leaders
Q.6 Were there any janapadas in your state? If yes, name them. If not, name the janapadas that would have been closest to your state, and mention whether they were to the east, west, north or south.
Solution: The answer is subjective to the region and area you live in. Take the assistance of your subject teacher and also the help of the map given on page 57 in the textbook to prepare your answer.
Q.7 Find out whether any of the groups mentioned in answer 2 pay taxes today
Solution: Out of the groups mentioned in answer 2, traders are the ones who pay taxes today.
Q.8 Find out whether the groups mentioned in answer 3 have voting rights.
Solution: Today, voting rights are not decided by gender or profession. Women, ‘kammakaras’ and ‘dasas’ – all are entitled to vote today.
Kingdoms, Kings and An Early Republic Summary
The NCERT Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 5 talks about the following topics:
Students can access the chapter wise answers of the History, Geography and Civics by visiting NCERT Solutions Class 6 Social Science page at BYJU’S.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The main topics that students will learn in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History are:
How some men became rulers
Janapadas
Mahajanapadas
Taxes
Changes in agriculture
A closer look – (a) Magadha
A closer look – (b) VajjiHow can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 PDF online?You can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 PDF from the links provided at BYJU’S website. Students only need to register themselves with BYJU’S to download the solutions PDF for free. All the solutions are created by expert tutors having vast experience in their respective subject following the latest CBSE guidelines. Students wishing to obtain a better idea of answering the textbook questions can refer to the solutions PDF.Why should students opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 for reference?Students should opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 as it’s handy and easy to comprehend. Moreover, the solutions can be viewed online and downloaded in PDF for offline use by the students at no cost and without any time constraints. All the solutions are curated by subject experts at BYJU’S using simple language for the ease of learning. Neat explanations in paragraphs and using bulletins in the solutions help students learn answer presentation skills vital for exams.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5
What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
How can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 PDF online?
Why should students opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 5 for reference?
