NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 6
Students who are preparing for their Social Science exam must go through NCERT Solutions. Here, we have provided the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6 “New Questions and Ideas”. These solutions contain the answers to the exercise questions. These answers are created by our subject experts after thorough research. The answers cover all the important points and are exclusively designed for exam preparation. Students can write the same answers as provided in the solution PDF. These solutions will help in scoring high marks in Social Science subject.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF below.
 NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (History – Our Pasts – I) Chapter 6 New Questions and Ideas:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6 – New Questions and Ideas
The Solutions for Chapter 6, New Questions and Ideas are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Q.1 Describe the ways in which the Buddha tried to spread his message to the people?
Solution: The Buddha tried to spread his message to the people in the following ways:
1. He conveyed his teaching in the Prakrit language, which was the language of the common masses.
2. He encouraged his followers to think over his messages, instead of blindly following them. This helped his ideals spread further. The encouragement of free-thinking meant that people could come to conclusions based on his ideas, on their own.
Q.2 Write whether true or false:
Solution: a) False
Buddha professed kindness for animals. He discouraged the practice of sacrificing animals.
(b) True
Sarnath is where Buddha taught for the first time after enlightenment. He attained enlightenment at Bodh Gaya.
(c) False
Karma means action or the work we do. Buddha believed that Karma affects our current and next lives.
(d) True
Buddha did meditation for several days under a Peepal (Banyan) tree in Bodh Gaya, where he attained enlightenment.
(e) True
Atman means individual soul, whereas Brahman means universal soul. Those who follow the Upanishads believed that Atman and Brahman were the same.
Q.3 What were the questions Upanishadic thinkers wanted to answer?
Solution: The Upanishadic thinkers wanted to find answers to the following questions:
1. What happens after death?
2. Is there any life after death?
3. Why should sacrifices be performed?
4. Is there something permanent in the Universe, which lasts even after death?
Q.4 What were the main teachings of Mahavira?
Solutions: The following are the main teachings of Mahavira:
1. Those who wish to know the truth must leave his/her home.
2. Those who are on the path of truth must adhere to the principles of Ahimsa (Non-violence), very strictly.
3. One must not hurt or kill any other living being, as life is dear to all.
Q.5 Why do you think Anagha’s mother wanted her to know the story of the Buddha?
Solution: Anagha was travelling to Varanasi on a school trip. Sarnath is a place in Varanasi, where Buddha taught for the first time after attaining enlightenment in Bodh Gaya. The story and message of Buddha were inspiring, and hence Anagha’s mother wanted her to know the story of Buddha.
Q.6 Do you think it would have been easy for slaves to join the Sangha? Give reasons for your answer.
Solution: Everyone except men had to take permission from his/her master before joining the Sangha. Children had to take permission from their masters, servants had to take permission from the Kings, the wives from their husbands and the slaves from their masters.
It wouldn’t have been easy for the slaves to join the sangha because:
1. Slaves had little to no rights.
2. It was not necessary that a slave would get a kind master
3. Since society, in general, depended on slaves to do their tasks for them, there was no incentive for masters to give permission for their slaves to join the Sangha.
Q.7 Make a list of at least five ideas and questions mentioned in this lesson. Choose three from the list and discuss why you think they are important even today.
Solution:
The Ideas and questions mentioned in the chapter are the following:
Questions:
1. Is there a life after death?
2. What was Buddha trying to teach Kisagotami?
3. How did the beggar convince sages to share food with them?
Ideas:
4. One should follow the principle of ahimsa.
5. One should renounce worldly pleasure in search of the truth.
Discussion:
1. What was Buddha trying to teach Kisagotami?
Explanation: Kishagotami had lost her son, so she was taken to Buddha. He requested Kishagotami to get mustard seeds from a house where no one had died. She found no such house, as someone – a son, daughter, father, grandfather or grandmother had died in all of those houses. Buddha wanted to convey to her that death is a part of the cycle of life and nothing can be done to avoid it. One must not lose hope after losing a loved one. This teaching is very important even today.
2. How did the Beggar convince sages to share food with them?
Explanation: The sages worshiped the universal soul. The sages shared food with the beggar as he proved that he too was part of the universal soul. This shows that we must respect every living being as we are all a part of the universal soul or Brahman.
3.. One should renounce worldly pleasure in search of the truth.
Explanation: Both Jainism and Buddhism teach that in the search of the truth one must reject all worldly pleasures and material wealth. Buddha believed that life is full of suffering and unhappiness because of our desires.
Q.8 Find out more about men and women who renounce the world today. Where do they live, what clothes do they wear, what do they eat? Why do they renounce the world?
Solution: Prepare this with the help of your subject teacher.
New Questions and Ideas Summary
The NCERT Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 6 talks about the following topics:
Click on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science to get the solutions of the History, Geography and Civics subject at one place.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6Does the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6 provide accurate information for the board exam preparation?The solutions offered by BYJU’S are accurate enough based on the guidelines set by the CBSE board. The faculty create the modules passionately so that students can learn new topics efficiently. NCERT Solutions are detailed yet easy to comprehend making it interesting for the students to refresh the concepts after learning them. Students can access the PDF format of solutions which are available in BYJU’S with a free download option and score well in the board exams. The concepts are explained in an elaborate manner to help students grasp them without any difficulty.Can the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6 help students to fetch good marks in the board exam?BYJU’S is an online learning portal where chapters and exercises have been framed by the experts to help students practice well for their board exams. The answers are prepared and reviewed by the subject matter experts who possess vast experience in the respective subject. The solutions are created by keeping in mind the method of helping students to learn new concepts at this stage. So the main aim of providing solutions is to empower students with knowledge.What topics are important in the Chapter 6 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The NCERT Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 6 talks about the following topics:
1. The story of the Buddha
2. Upanishads
3. Jainism
4. The Sangha
5. Monasteries
To learn these concepts effortlessly, students are recommended to download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History and refer to them while answering the textbook questions. The solutions are given in both online and offline mode to help students to learn the subject at their own pace.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6
Does the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6 provide accurate information for the board exam preparation?
Can the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 6 help students to fetch good marks in the board exam?
What topics are important in the Chapter 6 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
