NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 9
This chapter talks about traders, kingdoms along the coast, the spread of Buddhism, the reasons behind the visit of pilgrims to the monasteries, the rise of Bhakti and reasons behind its popularity. After going through these topics, students will find the questions related to these in the exercise. In NCERT Solutions Class 6 History Chapter 9 “Traders, Kings, and Pilgrims”, we have provided the answers to the exercise questions. These solutions will help students to prepare better for their annual exam.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (Our Pasts-I) Chapter 9 Traders, Kings and Pilgrims:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science History Chapter 9- Traders, Kings, and Pilgrims”
The Solutions for Chapter 9, Traders, Kings and Pilgrims are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Let’s Recall
Solution 1:
2. Why did kings want to control the Silk Route?
Solution 2:
3. What kinds of evidence do historians use to find out about trade and trade routes?
Solution 3:
They found evidence through multiple sources.
4. What were the main features of Bhakti
Solution 4:
Let’s Discuss
5. Discuss the reasons why the Chinese pilgrims came to India.
Solution 5:
They came to visit places associated with the life of Buddha as well as famous monasteries. They spent time studying in Nalanda.
6. Why do you think ordinary people were attracted to Bhakti?
Solution 6:
Anyone irrespective of gender, economic status and caste status could follow this path. Hence, it attracted ordinary people.
Let’s Do
7. List five things that you buy from the market. Which of these are made in the city/village in which you live and which are brought by traders from other areas?
Solution 7:
This is an activity that needs to be carried out by students.
8. There are several major pilgrimages performed by people in India today. Find out about any one of them, and write a short description. (Hint: who can go on the pilgrimage — men, women or children? How long does it take? How do people travel? What do they take with them? What do they do when they reach the holy place? Do they bring anything back with them?)
Solution 8:
This is an activity that needs to be carried out by students. There are plenty of pilgrimage centres. Students can choose one from their own experience.
Traders, Kings, and Pilgrims Summary
The NCERT Class 6 History Our Pasts-I Chapter 9 talks about the following topics:
Students can access the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science at BYJU’S and can make their studies easier.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 9What are the topics that students will learn in Chapter 9 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The NCERT Class 6 History Our Pasts-I Chapter 9 talks about the following topics:
How to find out about trade and traders
New kingdoms along the coast
The story of the silk route
The spread of Buddhism
The quest of the Pilgrims
The beginnings of Bhakti
What are the key specialities of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 9 of BYJU’S?The key specialities of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 9 are:
1. It provides solutions for all the textbook questions.
2. Improves conceptual learning and analytical reasoning among students.
3. BYJU’S NCERT Solutions are the most reliable study guides that students can confidently rely on for exam preparations.
4. Solutions contain detailed and precise explanations in simple language to aid students to understand the main topics easily.What are the important questions that students can expect from Chapter 9 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The important questions that students can expect from Chapter 9 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History are:
1. What were the main features of Bhakti
2. What kinds of evidence do historians use to find out about trade and trade routes?
3. Why did kings want to control the Silk Route?
To learn the right answers for the above questions, students can refer to the solutions PDF available for free. 
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 9
What are the topics that students will learn in Chapter 9 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
What are the key specialities of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 9 of BYJU’S?
What are the important questions that students can expect from Chapter 9 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
