Long Answear Type Questions
Q. 1. Give the diagnostic characters of Algae.
Ans. The diagnostic characters of Algae are:
(i) Algae are usually aquatic, either marine or fresh water.
(ii) Plant body is unicellular, colonial, filamentous, parenchymatous or pseudo –
parenchymatous.
(iii) Algae, like other aquatic plants, are covered over by mucilage. Mucilage protects the
algae from epiphytic growth and decaying effect of water.
(iv) Vascular tissues are absent.
(v) A mechanical tissue is absent. The algae are held upright in water due to buoyancy
provided by the latter
(vi) Nutrition is photosynthetic.
(vii) Plants contain chlorophyll 𝑎, carotenes and xanthophylls. Additional pigments occur in
specific groups.
(viii) Vegetative and asexual modes of reproduction are abundant. Asexual spores are of two
types, mitospores and meiospores.
(ix) Sexual reproduction involves isogamy, anisogamy and oogamy in different groups.
(x) An embryo stage is absent.
Q. 2. Why mosses and ferns are considered as amphibians of plant kingdom?
Ans. Mosses (bryophytes) and ferns (pteridophytes) are considered as amphibians of plant
kingdonm, because of the following reasons:
(i) The gametophyte of both bryophytes and pteridophytes lack cuticle covering, therefore
they grow in moist habitat to prevent desiccation.
(ii) In absence of vascular tissues, all parts of the gametophyte are able to absorb water
directly from moist habitat.
(iii) The flagellated sperms of both the groups require an external supply of water for
swimming to reach archegonia for affecting fertilization.
Q. 3. Differentiate between Red, Brown and Green Algae.

[V.Imp]

Ans.
S. No.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Red Algae
Mainly marine.
Only a few ate
unicethular.
Thylakuids
unstacked.

Brown Algae
Marine forms
Unicellular forms do
not exist.
Occur in groups of
three.

Green Algae
Chiefly freshwater.
Unicellular species
are more.
Stacked in groups of
2-20

(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)

Only chlorophyla
present.
Fucoxanthin pnsent.
Phycobilins prement
Reserve food is
floridean starch.
Motile stages are not
observed.

Chlorophyll “a“ and
“c” present.
Fucosanthin is
present.
Absent.
Reserve food is
laminarin.
Present.

Chloophyll 'a' and' 'b'
is present
Fucosanthin is
absent.
Phycobilins absent.
Reserve food is
starch.
Motile stage is
present.

Q. 4. Write the characteristics of seedless vascular plante (Pheridophytes).
Ans. The characteristics of seedless vascular plante (Pheridophytes) are:
(i) Dominant phase or plant body is a sporophyte.
(ii) Plant body is differentiated into true roots, stems and leaves.
(iii) Vascular tissues are present. They are of two types; xylem and phloem. In xylem, true
vessels are absent. In phloem, companion cells and sieve tube are absent. Instead, sieve
cells are present.
(iv) Meiospores are formed inside sporangia. Sporangia are associated with leaves called
sporophylls.
(v) Gametophyte is small or inconspicuous. It is usually independent.
(vi) Sex organs are multicellular and jacketed. It is usually independent. Archegonia are
partially embedded. Archegonial neck is 4-rowed.
(vii) Sperms are flagellate: They require an external supply of water for swimming to reach
archegonia.
(viii) Embryo stage is present.
(ix) Heteromorphic or heterologous alternation of generations is present in the life cycle.
Q. 5. What are ferns? Describe their salient features.
Ans. (i) Ferns are found in tropical regions and dry rocky places.
(ii) The plant body is distinguished into (i) underground stem such as rhizome (ii) it bears
roots (ii) it sends aerial shoots. Leaves of fern are of two types: simple leaves with a single
vein and compound leaves with several leaflets.
(iii) The sporophyte phase is dominant in ferns.
(iv) On the underside of leaflets are borne sori.
(v) Sorus is protected by indusium. The sori contains sporangia.
(vi) Spores germinate into prothallus, the gametophyte.

(vi) The gametophyte bears antheridia and archegonia on underside. The archegonia are at
notch but the antheridia lie towards the tip between rhizoids. The antheridia bear flagellated
sperms. The eggs lie at the base of the archegonia.
(vii) The process of fertilization occurs when water is available for the flagellated sperms, to
swim to reach the egg and the zygote is formed.
(ix) First leaves appear above prothallus. The roots develop below it.
Q. 6. Write the salient features of vascular plants?
Ans. The salient features of Vascular plants are:
(i) The plant body is differentiated into true stem, leaves and roots and show a distinct division
of labour for leading photoautotrophic life on land Roots fix the plant and absorb water and
minerals from the soil.
(ii) They possess vascular or conductive tissues xylem and phloem. Xylem transport water
and mineral, while phloem conduct organic food.
(iii) The dominant phase or plant body is a sporophyte. Gametophyte is reduced, either lives
independent life or dependent upon the sporophyte.
(iv) Multiplication occurs by vegetative propagation and sexual reproduction. Meiosis occurs
at the time of spore formation (sporic meiosis) inside sporangia borne on leaves called
sporophylls.
(v) An embryo stage is present in the life cycle.
Q. 7. Explain briefly the alternation of generation in bryophytes.
OR
What do you understand by "alternation of generation"? Explain it with the examples of
moss.
Ans. Alternation of Generations:
During the life cycle of any sexually reproducing plant, there is alternation of generations
between gamete producing haploid gametophyte and spore producing diploid sporophyte
(i)The life cycle of moss represents two distinct generations: gametophytic and the
sporophytic.
(ii) Moss plant is a gametophyte.
(iii) Spore is the beginning of the gametophytic generation. It develops into protenema which
gives rise to male and female gametophytes.
(iv) Gametophyte (haploid) consists of green thallus having archegoniophores and
antheridiophores which bear sex organs and the gametes are produced in them either in
monoecious or dioecious plants.
(v) Zygote is formed after the fertilization (syngamy) of male and female gametes with the
help of water.

(vi) Repeated divisions of the zygote give rise to the embryo (2N) which soon develops into
sporophyte.
(vii) The sporophyte of moss gets differentiated into three parts-foot, seta and capsule. Inside
the capsule single celled spores are produced.
(viii) After the dehiscences, they begin to germinate and give rise to the protonema to start
the cycle again.

