Short Answer Type Questions – I
Q. 1. Name the class of algae to which Laminaria belong. Draw labelled diagram of
Laminaria showing its holdfast, stipe and frond.
(DDE)
Ans. Laminaria belongs to class phaeophyceae.

Q. 2. Bring out the differences between chlorophyceae and phaeophyceae.

(KVS 2017)

Ans.
Phaeophyceae
(i) Marine forms. Uncellular forms do not
exist.
(ii) Fucoxanthin is present, which is
responsible for the brown colour of the algae
(iii) Reserve food is laminarin

Chlorophyceae
Chiefly fresh water in nature. Unicellular
species are more.
Chlorophyll ‘a’ is present. Fucoxanthin is
absent.
Reserve food is starch.

Q. 3. What are the similarities between algae and fungi ?
Ans. (i) They occur in aquatic and semi-aquatic habitats.
(ii) Both have simple body called thellies ic te not ditterentiabrd into roots, steem and leaves.
(iii) Asexual reproduction occurs by micropores.
(iii) Sex organs are unisexual and non-jacketed.
Q. 4. Name two pigments other than chlorophyll that are found in algae which help in
grouping them into red and brown algae.
Ans. Red algae contains phycocyanins, phycoerythrin and phycocyarin pigpments, Brows
algae contains carotenoids and fucoxanthin besides chicrophyll ‘a’ and ‘c’ The fucoxanthin
pigments makes the green colour of the chlorophyll.
Q. 5. Write any four main characteristic features of algae.
Ans. The main characteristic features of algae are :

(i) The body od thallus of multicellular algae ranges from microscopic, colonial aggregates of
cells, fine filaments to flattened sheets of cells.
(ii) Vascular tissues are absent in algae.
(iii) Mechanical tiesues are also absent in algae.
(iv) Most algae multiply by vegetative and asexual and modes of reproduction.
Q. 6 How does the red algae prepare their food ?
Ans. Red algae are marine and mostly occur in oceans. The photosynthetic pigments are
phycoerythrin and phycocyanin along with chlorophyll and carotenoid. Red algse are photoautotrophic in their mode of nutrition. They synthesize food in presence of chlorophyll in their
chromatophores or chloroplasts.
Q. 7. What are the modes of reproduction in algae ?
Ans. (i) Most algae multiply by vegetative and asexual modes of reproduction.
(ii) Asexual spores are of two types, mitospores or meiospores which are mostly motile or non
– motile.
(iii) Sexual reprodaction involves fusion of gametes.
(iv) It may be isogamoias (fusion of similar gametes), anisogamous (fusion of dissimilar
gametes) or oogamous (fusion of gamets different in size, shape and behaviour) type.
Q. 8. What are phycocolloids ? List their functions.
Ans. Brown algae have a colBoidal covering over their cellulosic cell wall, consisting of a
mixture of polysaccharides collectively called phycocolloids. 𝑒. 𝑔 ., alginic acid (algin), fucoildin
and fucin. These prevents drying or freezing (in water), when algae are exposed to air during
low tides and protect cells when waves beat them against the rocks.
Q. 9. Why do mosses thrive only in moist habitat ?
Ans. Monses (bryophytes) are non-vascular land plant of moist habitat that grow densely
together and often form green carpets or mats on damp soils. It is because in the absence of
roots, thallus absorbs water and minerals directly from gound or atmosphere, Hence, they can
thrive only on moist places,
Q. 10. Describe the importance of mosses.
Ans. The importance of mosses are :
(i) Mosses form dense mat over soil preventing soil erosion.
(ii) These play an important role in plant succession on rocky areas.
(iii) Sphagnum, a moss provide peat which is a valuable fuel like coal. It is also used as
packing material for trans shipment of living material because of their capacity to hold water.
Q. 11. What are thallophyta ? How many groups are included in it ?

Ans. Thallophyta posesses the simplest plants which possess undifferentiated or thallus like
forms. Vascular tissues are absent. Differentiation of true roots, stems and leaves is also
absent.
Q. 12. How does an algae differ from fungi ?
Ans.
S. No.
(i)
(ii)

Algae
Chlorophyll present therefore
they are green.
Autotropic nutrition.

(iii)
(iv)

Absorb inorganic and
mineral salts
Chlamydomonas and
Ulothrix.

Fungi
Chlorophylil absent, they are
non-green.
Heterotrophic nutrition
saprophytic and parasitic.
Absorb organic and mineral
salts.
Aibugo and Yeant.

Q. 13. What are horsetails ?
Ans. (i) Honetails are represented by a single genus Equisetum.
(ii) It is a fern in which the plant body has a underground rhizome that bears acrial green
stems. It makes this plant to bear a fanciful resemblance to a horsetail.
(iii) Leaves are small, scale like and form whorls at nodes.
(iv) Leaves bear strobili at the tips of stems that produce spores. On germination spores
produce gametophyte.
Q. 14. Write a note on protonema.
Ans. Protonema is a thread like chain of cells that forms the haploid gametophytic phase in
the life cyle mosses and liver worts. When a moss grows from the spore, it grows as a
protonema, which develops into a leafy gametophore.
Q.15. Mention the ploidy of the following:
(i) Protonemal cell of moss
(ii) Prothallus cells of fern
(iii) Primary endosperm nucleus in dicot
(iv) Leaf cell of a moss.
Ans. (i) Haploid (ii) Haploid (ii) Triploid (iv) Haploid

(KVS 2017)

Q. 16. Differentiate between Cryptogams and Phanerogams ?
Ans.
S. No

Cryptogams

(i)

These are seedless plants.

(ii)

It has three divisions
thallophytes, bryophytes and
pteridophytes.
An ovule is not formed.
Pollination is absent.
The plants require external
water for fertilization.

(iii)
(iv)
(v)

Phanerogams
Phanerogams are seeded
plants.
There is only one division of
spermatophyta.
An ovule is present.
Pollination is present.
External water is not
required for fertilization.

