Short Answer Questions

Q.1. What does ‘Segregation’ mean in South Africa?
Ans. Trains, buses, taxis, hotels, hospitals, schools and colleges, libraries,
cinema halls, theaters, beaches, swimming pools, public toilets, were all
separate for the whites and blacks in South Africa. This was called
‘Segregation’.
Q.2. How white racist continued their apartheid besides protests?
Ans. Many sensitive whites also joined the African National Congress to
oppose apartheid. Several countries denounced apartheid as unjust and
racist. But the white racist government continued to rule by torturing and
killing black and coloured people.
Q.3. When did apartheid end in South Africa?
Ans. As protests and struggles against apartheid had increased, the
government realised that they could no longer keep the blacks under their
rule through repression. Finally at midnight of 26th April, 1994, the Republic
of South Africa got freedom from apartheid.
Q.4. What policies were changed by white regime in South Africa?
Ans. Discriminatory laws were repealed. Ban on political parties and
restrictions on media was lifted. After 28 years of imprisonment Nelson
Mandela came released from Jail. The apartheid government came to an end.
Q.5. What compromise was made by whites minority in South
Africa?
Ans. The whites agreed to the principle of majority rule and that of one
person one vote. They also agreed to accept some basic rights for the poor
and the workers.
Q.6. What compromise was made by black majority in South Africa?
Ans. The blacks agreed that majority rule would not be absolute. They
agreed that the majority would not take away the property of the white
minority.
Q.7. Which basic values were incorporated in our constitution from
these pre-independence decisions?
Ans. (i) Universal Adult Franchise.

(ii) Right to freedom and equality.
(iii) Protecting the rights of minorities.
Q.8. What institutional details and procedures Indians derive from
colonial laws?
Ans. The experience gained by Indians in the working of the legislative
institutions proved to be very useful for the country in setting up its own
institutions and working in them. Many institutional details and procedures
from colonial laws like the Government of India Act of 1935 have been
referred while drafting the constitution.
Q.9. Which countries’ constitutional features inspired Indian
Constitution makers?
Ans. (i) Ideals of French Revolution
(ii) Parliamentary democracy of Britain
(iii) Bill of Rights in US and
(iv) Socialist Revolution in Russia.
Q.10. Name some of the members of the Constituent Assembly?
Ans. (i) Dr. Rajendra Prasad (President).
(ii) Jaipal Singh (A sportsman and educationist later founder of Jharkhand
Party)
(iii) Baldev Singh (An entrepreneur and a leader of the Panthic Akali Party)
(iv) B.R. Ambedkar (Chairman Drafting Committee)
(v) JawaharLal Nehru (Prime Minister of the Interim Government)
(vi) Sarojini Naidu (Poet, writer and political activist)
(vii) Shyama Prasad Mukherjee (Minister for industry and supply in the
interim Government Educationist and lawyer).
Q.11. What do you know about Nelson Mandela?
Ans. (i) Nelson Mandela was a South African leader who was tried for
treason by the White South African government.
(ii) He and seven other leaders were sentenced to life imprisonment in 1964,
for daring to oppose the apartheid regime in his country.
(iii) He spent the next 28 years in Robben Island, South Africa’s most
dreaded prison.

(iv) He was released after 28 years from jail, and at midnight of the 26th of
April 1994, South Africa got independence. He became the first President of
independent South Africa.
Q.12. What do you understand by the term ‘apartheid’?
Ans. Apartheid refers to the official policy of racial separation and illtreatment of blacks followed by the white government of South Africa
between 1948 and 1989. This practice of racial discrimination remained for
the longest period in South Africa.
Q.13. What basic rules are followed to form a Constitution?
Ans. The basic rules are:
(i) The rules should lay down how the rulers are to be chosen in future.
(ii) These rules should also determine what the elected governments are
empowered to do and what they cannot do.
(iii) These rules should decide the rights of the citizens.
Q.14. What documents were taken by the Constituent Assembly to
form the Indian Constitution?
Ans. The documents taken to form the Indian Constitution were:
(i) The Indian Constitution was drafted by Motilal Nehru and eight other
leaders in 1928.
(ii) The resolution at the Karachi Session of the INC on how independent
India’s Constitution should look like in 1931.
(iii) Both these documents were committed to the inclusion of universal
adult franchise right to freedom and quality and protecting the right of
minorities in the constitution of independent India.
Q.15. How was the Constituent Assembly formed?
Ans. The drafting of the Constitution was done by an assembly of elected
representatives called the Constituent Assembly.
(i) Elections to the Constituent Assembly were held in July 1946.
(ii) Its first meeting was held in December 1946.
(iii) The Constituent Assembly was also divided into the Constituent
Assembly of India and Pakistan after the partition.
(iv) The Constituent Assembly that wrote the Indian Constitution constituted
as many as 299 members.

It adopted the Constitution on 26 November, 1949, but it came into effect on
26 January, 1950.
Q.16. When was the Constitution completed and why was it imposed
on 26 January, 1950?
Ans. (i) The Constituent Assembly completed the Constitution on 26
November, 1949.
(ii) But it was imposed on 26 January, 1950 to give due importance to the
date, 26th January.
(iii) To mark this day we celebrate it as the Republic Day every year.
(a) Jawaharlal Nehru declared Independence Day of India on 26th January,
1931.
Q.17. Give reasons for accepting the Constitution made by the
Constituent Assembly more than 50 years ago.
Ans. Some reasons for accepting the same Constitution till today are:
(i) The Constitution does not reflect the views of its members alone. It
expresses a broad consensus of its time.
(ii) The Constituent Assembly represented the people of India. There was no
Universal Adult Franchise at that time. So, the Constituent Assembly could
not have been chosen directly by all the people of India but it was elected
mainly by the members of Provincial Legislatures, which ensured a fair share
of all the regions of the country.
(iii) The Constituent Assembly worked in a systematic, open and consensual
manner.
Q.18. What was the ‘Drafting Committee’?
Ans. The ‘Drafting Committee’ prepared a draft of the Constitution for
discussion:
(i) It was chaired by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar.
(ii) Several rounds of thorough discussion took place on the Draft of the
Constitution, clause by clause.
(iii) The members worked for 114 days spread over three years.
Later on, it was thrown open to the public to get their opinion.
Q.19. What are ‘Constituent Assembly Debates’?

Ans. Every document presented and every word spoken in the Constituent
Assembly has been recorded and preserved. These are called ‘Constituent
Assembly Debates’.
(i) These debates provide the rationale behind every provision of the
Constitution.
(ii) These are used to interpret the meaning of the Constitution.
(iii) When printed, these debates constitute 12 bulky volumes.
Q.20. In which two ways can the philosophy of the Indian
Constitution be understood?
Ans. The two ways in which the philosophy of the Indian Constitution can be
understood are:
(i) It can be understood by reading the views of some of the major leaders
on the Indian Constitution.
(ii) We can understand by reading what the Constitution says about its own
philosophy.
Q.21. How did the blacks of South Africa fight against the practice of
apartheid?
Ans. (i) Since 1950, the blacks, coloured and Indians fought against the
apartheid system. They launched protest marches and strikes.
(ii) The African National Congress (ANC) was the umbrella organisation which
led the struggle against the policies of segregation.
(iii) This included many workers’ union and the Communist Party.
(iv) Many sensitive whites also joined the ANC to oppose apartheid and
played a leading role in this struggle.
(v) Several countries also denounced apartheid as unjust and racist.
Q.22. What kind of inspiration do we get from South Africa?
Ans. (i) The South African constitution inspires democrats all over the world.
(ii) A state denounced by the entire world till recently as the most
undemocratic one is now seen as a model of democracy.
(iii) What made this change possible was the determination of the people of
South Africa to work together to transform bitter experiences into the binding
glue of a rainbow nation.

Q.23. What were Nelson Mandela’s views on the South African
constitution?
Ans. (i) He felt that the Constitution of South Africa speaks of both past and
its future.
(ii) On one hand, it is a solemn pact in which they, as South Africans, declare
to one another that they shall never permit a repetition of their racist, brutal
and repressive past.
(iii) It is also a charter for the transformation of their country into one which
is truly shared by all its people—a country which in the fullest sense belongs
to all of them, black and white, women and men.
Q.24. Who was Dr. B.R. Ambedkar? How did he play a key role in the
making of Indian constitution?
Ans. (i) Dr. Ambedkar was the chairman of the Drafting Committee.
(ii) He was a social revolutionary, thinker and agitator against caste divisions
and caste-based inequalities.
(iii) Dr. Ambedkar played a key role in the making of the constitution but had
a different understanding of how inequalities could be removed.
(iv) He often bitterly criticised Mahatma Gandhi and his vision.
Q.25. How values of freedom struggle were embedded in the
Preamble of the Indian constitution?
Ans. (i) Values that inspired and guided the freedom struggle and were in
turn nurtured by it, formed the foundation for India’s democracy.
(ii) These values are embedded in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.
(iii) They guide all the articles of the Indian Constitution.
(iv) The Constitution begins with a short statement of its basic values. This is
called the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.
Q.26. Why Preamble is called the preface of the Indian constitution?
Ans. (i) The Preamble of the constitution contains the philosophy on which
the entire constitution has been built.
(ii) It provides a standard to examine and evaluate any law and action of the
government to find out whether it is good or bad.
(iii) It is the soul of Indian constitution. It reads like a poem on democracy.

