HOTS (Higher Order Thinking Skills)

Q.1. Explain the necessity of a constitution in the newly born
democracy in South Africa.
Or
How was a new constitution of South Africa Formed?
Ans. (i) After the emergence of the new democratic South Africa, black
leaders appealed to fellow blacks to forgive the whites for the atrocities they
had committed while in power.
(ii) They thought of building a new South Africa based on equality of all races
and men and women on democratic values, social justice and human rights.
(iii) The party that ruled through oppression and brutal killings and the party
that led the freedom struggle sat together to draw up a common
constitution.
(iv) After two years of discussion and debate, they came out with one of the
finest constitutions the world had ever had.
(v) This Constitution gave to its citizens the most extensive rights available
in any country.
(vi) Together, they decided that in search for a solution to the problems,
nobody should be excluded, no one should be treated as a demon. They
agreed that everybody should become part of the solution, whatever they
might have done or represented in the past.
Q.2. Outline the agreements made by both ethnic groups of South
Africa for their constitution.
Ans. The whites agreed to the principle of majority rule and that of oneperson-one-vote. They also agreed to accept some basic rights for the poor
and the workers. The blacks agreed that majority rule would not be absolute.
They agreed that the majority would not take away the property of the white
minority.
Q.3. Which were the factors that helped the Indian leaders to
develop the constitution?
Ans. The countries which inspired the Indian Constitution were:

(i) France: Many Indian leaders were inspired by the ideals of the French
Revolution and their resolution on liberty, equality and fraternity.
(ii) Britain: Indian leaders were inspired by the practice of Parliamentary
democracy in Britain.
(iii) US: Their Bill of Rights was a great inspiration.
(iv) Russia: The socialist revolution and the socialist economy of Russia also
inspired the leaders of India.
Q.4. “India emerged as an independent country amidst heavy
turmoil. Justify the statement by explaining the challenges before
the constitution makers of India.
Ans. (i) A constitution is mainly about embodying the values into
institutional arrangements.
(ii) It is a very long and detailed document. Therefore, it needs to be
amended quite regularly to keep it updated.
(iii) So the makers of the Indian constitution made provisions to incorporate
changes from time to time. These changes are called constitutional
amendment.
(iv) The Constitution describes the institutional arrangements in a legal
language.
(v) Like any constitution, the Indian Constitution lays down a procedure for
choosing persons to govern the country. It defines who will have how much
power to take which decisions.
(vi) And it also puts limits to what the government can do by providing some
rights to the citizen that cannot be violated.
Q.5. How has Indian Constitution embodied the basic values into its
institutional arrangements? Explain.
Ans. (i) Inclusion of Universal Adult Franchise by giving all the citizens of
India the right to vote and contest elections.
(ii) Right to freedom and equality to be granted. Since India remained under
British control for a long time and being a country of diversities, it needed
equality.
(iii) It also proposed for protecting the rights of minorities in the constitution
of independent India.
Q.6. Explain ideals of the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.

Ans. (i) We the people of India: The Constitution has been drawn up and
enacted by the people through their representatives, and not handed down
to them by a King or any outside powers.
(ii) Sovereign: People have supreme right to make decisions on internal as
well as external matters. No external power can dictate the government of
India.
(iii) Socialist: Wealth is generated socially and should be shared equally by
the society. Government should regulate the ownership of land and industry
to reduce socio-economic inequalities.
(iv) Secular: Citizens have complete freedom to follow any religion. But
there is no official religion. Government treats all religious beliefs and
practices with equal respect.
(v) Democratic: A form of government where people enjoy equal political
rights, elect their rulers and hold them accountable.
(vi) Republic: The head of the state is an elected person and its not a
hereditary position.
(vii) Justice: Citizens cannot be discriminated on the grounds of caste,
religion and gender. Social inequalities have to be reduced. Government
should work for the welfare of all, especially for the disadvantaged groups.
(viii) Liberty: There are no unreasonable restrictions on the citizens about
what they think, how they wish to express their thoughts and the way they
wish to follow up their thoughts in actions.
(ix) Equality: All are equal before the law. The traditional social inequalities
have to be ended. The government should ensure equal opportunity for all.
(x) Fraternity: All of us should behave as if we are members of the same
family. No one should treat a fellow citizen as inferior.

