HOTS (Higher Order Thinking Skills)

Q.1. What is model code of conduct in Indian electoral system?
Mention its chief elements.
It is a set of norms, as prescribed by the Election Commission, to be followed
by all the political parties in our country for contesting elections or during
campaigns. It is called model code of conduct.
According to this no party or candidate can:
(i) Use any place of worship for election propaganda.
(ii) Use government vehicles, aircrafts and officials for elections.
(iii) Once elections are announced, ministers shall not lay foundation stones
of any projects, take any big policy decisions.
(iv) Ruling party cannot make any promises of providing public facilities.
Q.2. What system of declaration has been introduced on directions
from the Supreme Court regarding nomination of candidate in
election?
OR
What legal declaration is required to be submitted by each
candidate who wishes to contest an election?
Ans. Following are the legal declarations to be made by every candidate at
the time of filing nomination as per directed by the Supreme Court:
(i) Every candidate has to make legal declaration giving full details of serious
criminal cases pending against the candidate.
(ii) Details of assets and liabilities of the candidate and his or her family.
(iii) They also need to give their educational qualifications.
This information has to be made public. This provides an opportunity to the
voters to make their decision on the basis of information provided by the
candidates.
Q.3. Examine the need for reserved constituencies in India.
OR

Why were ‘reserved constituencies’ devised for the weaker sections
by the makers of the Indian constitution?
Ans.(i) The constitution makers were worried that in an open electoral
competition, certain weaker sections may not stand a chance to get elected
to the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assembly.
(ii) They may not have the required resources, education and contacts to
contest and win elections against others.
(iii) Those who are influential and resourceful may prevent them from
winning elections.
(iv) If that happens, our parliament and assemblies would be deprived of the
voice of a significant section of our population.
(v) That would make our democracy less representative and less democratic.
So, the makers of our constitution thought of a special system of reserved
constituencies for the weaker sections.

