HOTS (Higher Order Thinking Skills)

Q.1. “Rights are claims of persons over other fellow beings, over the
society and over the government Justify the statement.
Ans. (i) Rights are reasonable claims of persons recognised by society and
authorised by law.
(ii) In a democracy, every citizen has to have the right to vote and the right
to be elected in the government.
(iii) Rights are guarantees which can be used when things go wrong. Things
may go wrong when some citizens may wish to take away the rights of
others
(iv) The government should protect the citizens rights in such situations.
(v) When law recognises some claims they become enforceable. We can
then demand their application.
(vi) When fellow citizens or the government do not respect these rights we
call it violation or infringement of our rights.
Q.2. Suggest some constitutional basis to oppose the construction
of any dam which may displace the residents of that area.
Ans. (i) Residents of that area can oppose the construction of dam in their
area.
(ii) Since they are exercising the Right to freedom, nobody even the
government has any right to stop them from opposing the dam which would
affect the residents of that area and displace them.
(iii) The people of that area have a right to equality which means they must
get equal opportunity to live in their residential area.
(iv) They can hold protests to stop the building of dam without their
permission.
Q.3. Explain the procedure to be followed for arresting and
detaining of any person.
OR
What procedure should a citizen follow to get proper legal
justification, if he or she is arrested?

Ans. Following procedure needs to be followed:
(i) A person who is arrested and detained in custody will have to be informed
of the reasons for such arrest and detention.
(ii) A person who is arrested and detained shall be produced before the
nearest magistrate within a period of 24 hours of arrest.
(iii) Such a person has the right to consult a lawyer or engage a lawyer for
his defence.

