Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. Why do we have representative government in most
democracies?
Ans. In most democracies, people rule through their representatives. Since it
is not possible for everyone to have time and knowledge to take decisions on
all matters, representation is needed.
Q.2. What is the mechanism by which people can choose their
representatives and change them if they wish to?
Ans. The mechanism is ‘elections’.
Q.3. How are voters’ choices fulfilled by elections?
Ans. Voters can choose their law makers, their representatives who can take
major decisions of the government and can also choose the particular
political party whose policies are the best.
Q.4. How political parties can contribute in a condition to
democratic election?
Ans. There should be something to choose from. Parties and candidates
should be free to contest elections and should offer real choices to the
voters. Elections must be held after every few years.
Q.5. What kind of competition is offered to the people for elections?
Ans. The most obvious form is the competition among political parties. At
the constituency level, it takes the form of competition among several
candidates. If there is no competition, elections will be pointless.
Q.6. Give any two demerits of Electoral Competition.
Ans. (i) It creates a sense of disunity and factionalism in every locality.
(ii) Pressure to win electoral fights does not allow sensible long-term policies
to be formulated.
Q.7. How can political leaders be made accountable to the people?
Ans. It can be done by setting up a system where political leaders are
rewarded for serving the people and punished for not doing good for the
sake of people. Regular electoral competition should be held through
elections.

Q.8. How are general elections held in India?
Ans. For Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha, elections are held after every five
years. After five years the term of all the elected representatives comes to
an end. This is called ‘general elections’. They are held in all constituencies
at the same time.
Q.9. What are By Elections?
Ans. When elections are held only for one constituency to fill the vacancy
caused by death or resignation of a member, they are called By Elections.
Q.10. What are Electoral Constituencies?
Ans. The country is divided into different areas for ease in purpose of
representation. These areas are called ‘electoral constituencies’.
Q.11. How many constituencies do we have for Lok Sabha?
Ans. For Lok Sabha elections the country is divided into 543 constituencies.
Q.12. What is an elected representative from the constituency is
called?
Ans. The representative elected from each constituency is called a Member
of Parliament or an MP.
Q.13. How many seats are reserved for SC & ST in Lok Sabha?
Ans. Currently in the Lok Sabha, 79 seats are reserved for the scheduled
caste and 41 for the scheduled tribe.
Q.14. How many seats are reserved for women at local bodies?
Ans. One third of the total seats are reserved in rural and urban local bodies
for women candidates.
Q.15. What is the principle of universal adult franchise?
Ans. It means that everyone should have one vote and each vote should
have equal value. All the citizens aged 18 years and above have got the right
to vote.
Q.16. What is the Election Photo Identity Card System?
Ans. Every voter is issued this photo identity card by the Election
Commission. The voters are required to carry this card when they go out to
vote, so that no one can vote for someone else.
Q.17. What is a party ticket?

Ans. Political parties nominate their candidates who get the party symbol
and support. This party’s nomination is often called the party ‘ticket’.
Q.18. What are the legal declarations of a party candidate?
Ans. Details of assets and liabilities of the candidate and his or her family
and educational qualifications of the candidate.
Q.19. Why has personal information of a candidate to be made
public?
Ans. This information needs to be made public as it provides an opportunity
to the voters to make their decisions on the basis of the information provided
by the candidates.
Q.20. What is the time period of campaigning for elections?
Ans. In our country, such campaigns take place for a two-week period
between the announcement of the final list of candidates and the date of
polling.
Q.21. What is a ballot paper?
Ans. A ballot paper is a sheet of paper on which the names of the contesting
candidates along with party name and symbols are issued.
Q.22. What is EVM?
Ans. EVM is an electronic voting machine, which is used to record votes.
Q.23. How is a vote caste on EVM?
Ans. The machine shows the names of the candidates and the party
symbols. All the voter has to do is to press the button against the name of
the candidate he or she wants to give vote.
Q.24. What do you know about ‘Election Commission’?
Ans. In our country, elections are conducted by an independent and very
powerful election commission. It enjoys the same kind of independence that
the judiciary enjoys.
Q.25. What do you mean by ‘Turn out’?
Ans. Turn out indicates the percent of eligible voters who actually cast their
vote.
Q.26. Why do common people in India attach a lot of importance to
elections?

Ans. They feel that through elections they can bring pressure on political
parties to adopt policies and programmes favourable to them.
Q.27. Give any one challenge of Indian Elections.
Ans. Some families tend to dominate political parties; tickets are distributed
to relatives from the families.
Q.28. What is ‘booth capturing’?
Ans. Supporters or hired muscle men of a party or a candidate gain physical
control of a polling booth and cast false votes by threatening everyone or by
preventing genuine voters from reaching the polling booth.

