6
POPULATION

C

an you imagine a world without human
beings? Who would have utilised
the resources and created social and
cultural environment? The people are
important to develop the economy and the
society. The people make and use resources
and are themselves resources with varying
quality. Coal is but a piece of rock, until people
were able to invent technology to obtain it and
make it ‘resource’. Natural events, like a flood
or a Tsunami, becomes a ‘disaster’ only when
they affect a crowded village or a town.
Hence, population is the pivotal element in
social studies. It is the point of reference from
which all other elements are observed and from
which they derive significance and meaning.
‘Resources’, ‘calamities’ and ‘disasters’ are all
meaningful only in relation to human beings.
Their numbers, distribution, growth and
characteristics or qualities provide the basic
background for understanding and
appreciating all aspects of the environment.
Human beings are producers and
consumers of earth’s resources. Therefore, it
is important to know how many people are
there in a country, where do they live, how and
why their numbers are increasing and what
are their characteristics. The census of India
provides us with information regarding the
population of our country.

We are primarily concerned with three
major questions about population:
Population size and distribution: How
many people are there and where are they
located?
(ii) Population growth and processes of
population change: How has the
population grown and changed through
time?
(iii) Characteristics or qualities of the
population: What are their age, sex
composition, literacy levels, occupational
structure and health conditions?
(i)

POPULATION SIZE AND DISTRIBUTION
India’s Population Size and Distribution
by Numbers
India’s population as on March 2011 stood at
1,210.6 million, which account for 17.5 per cent
of the world’s population. These 1.21 billion
people are unevenly distributed over our
country’s vast area of 3.28 million square km,
which accounts for 2.4 per cent of the world’s
area (Figure 6.1).
The 2011 Census data reveal that Uttar
Pradesh with a population size of 199 million
is the most populous state of India. Uttar

Census
A census is an official enumeration of population done periodically. In India, the first census was held in the year
1872. The first complete census, however, was taken in the year 1881. Since then, censuses have been held
regularly every tenth year.
The Indian Census is the most comprehensive source of demographic, social and economic data. Have you
ever seen a census report? Check in your library if it has one.

2021–22

POPULATION

Rest of the world, 82.5%

India, 17.5%

AREA

Pradesh accounts for about 16 per cent of the
country’s population. On the other hand, the
Himalayan state of Sikkim has a population of
just about 0.6 million and Lakshadweep has
only 64,429 people.
Almost half of India’s population lives in
just five states. These are Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal and Andhra
Pradesh. Rajasthan, the biggest state in terms
of area, has only 5.5 per cent of the total
population of India (Figure 6.2)

Rest of the world, 97.6%

• What could be the reason
of uneven distribution of population in India?
India’s Population Distribution by Density

India, 2.4%

Fig 6.1 : India’s Share of World’s Area and Population

Population density provides a better picture
of the uneven distribution. Population density

Fig. 6.2: Distribution of Population
Source: Census of India, 2011
54

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

Fig. 6.3: Density of Population 2011

Note: Telangana became the 29th State of India in June 2014.
* State of Jammu and Kashmir was bifurcated into two union territories namely Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh on 05.08.19.
POPULATION

55

2021–22

is calculated as the number of persons per
unit area. India is one of the most densely
populated countries of the world.
Only Bangladesh and Japan have
higher average population densities
than India. Find out the population
densities of Bangladesh and Japan.

Do You Know

The population density of India in the year
2011 was 382 persons per sq km. Densities
vary from 1,102 persons per sq km in Bihar to
only 17 persons per sq km in Arunachal
Pradesh. A study of the Figure 6.3 shows the
pattern of uneven distribution of population
densities at the State level.
Activity
Study the Figure 6.3 and compare it with
Figure 2.4 and Figure 4.7. Do you find any
corelation between these maps?

Note the States with population densities
below 250 persons per square km. Rugged
terrain and unfavourable climatic conditions
are primarily responsible for sparse population
in these areas. Which states have density below
250 persons per square km?
Assam and most of the Peninsular states
have moderate population densities. Hilly,
dissected and rocky nature of the terrain,
moderate to low rainfall, shallow and less fertile
soils have influenced population densities in
these areas.
The Northern plains and Kerala in the south
have high to very high population densities
because of the flat plains with fertile soils and
abundant rainfall. Identify the three states of
the Northern Plains with high population
densities.

POPULATION GROWTH AND PROCESSES
OF POPULATION CHANGE
Population is a dynamic phenomenon. The
numbers, distribution and composition of the
population are constantly changing. This is the
influence of the interaction of the three processes,
namely — births, deaths and migrations.

Population Growth
Growth of population refers to the change in
the number of inhabitants of a country/territory
during a specific period of time, say during the
last 10 years. Such a change can be expressed
in two ways: in terms of absolute numbers and
in terms of percentage change per year.
The absolute numbers added each year or
decade is the magnitude of increase. It is
obtained by simply subtracting the earlier
population (e.g. that of 2001) from the later
population (e.g. that of 2011). It is referred to
as the absolute increase.
The rate or the pace of population increase
is the other important aspect. It is studied in
per cent per annum, e.g. a rate of increase of
2 per cent per annum means that in a given
year, there was an increase of two persons for
every 100 persons in the base population. This
is referred to as the annual growth rate.
India’s population has been steadily
increasing from 361 million in 1951 to 1210
million in 2011.
Table 6.1 : The Magnitude and Rate of India’s
Population Growth

Year

Total
Population
(in million)

Absolute
Increase in
the Decade
(in million)

Annual
Growth
Rate
(%)

1951
1961
1971
1981
1991
2001
2011

361.0
439.2
548.2
683.3
846.4
1028.7
1210.6

42.43
78.15
108.92
135.17
163.09
182.32
181.46

1.25
1.96
2.20
2.22
2.16
1.97
1.64

Table 6.1 and Figures 6.4 (a) and 6.4 (b)
reveal that from 1951 to 1981, the annual
rate of population growth was steadily
increasing; which explains the rapid increase
in population from 361 million in 1951 to
683 million in 1981.
• Table 6.1 reveals that despite the
decline in growth rates, the number of people being
added every decade is steadily increasing. Why?

Since 1981, however, the rate of growth
started declining gradually. During this period,
birth rates declined rapidly. Still 182 million

56

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

Fig. 6.4(a): India’s Population Growth Rates during 1951-2011

Fig. 6.4(b): India’s Population 1901-2011

people were added to the total population in
the 1990s alone (an annual addition larger
than ever before).
It is essential to realise that India has a very
large population. When a low annual rate is
applied to a very large population, it yields a

large absolute increase. When more than a
billion people increase even at a lower rate, the
total number being added becomes very large.
India’s annual increase in population is large
enough to neutralise efforts to conserve the
resource endowment and environment.

POPULATION

57

2021–22

The declining trend of the growth rate is
indeed a positive indicator of the efforts of birth
control. Despite that, the total additions to the
population base continue to grow, and India
may overtake China in 2045 to become the
most populous country in the world.
Processes of Population Change/Growth
There are three main processes of change of
population : birth rates, death rates and
migration.
The natural increase of population is the
difference between birth rates and death rates.
Birth rate is the number of live births per
thousand persons in a year. It is a major
component of growth because in India, birth
rates have always been higher than death
rates.
Death rate is the number of deaths per
thousand persons in a year. The main cause
of the rate of growth of the Indian population
has been the rapid decline in death rates.
Till 1980, high birth rates and declining
death rates led to a large difference between
birth rates and death rates resulting in higher
rates of population growth. Since 1981, birth
rates have also started declining gradually,
resulting in a gradual decline in the rate of
population growth. What are the reasons for
this trend?
The third component of population growth
is migration. Migration is the movement of
people across regions and territories. Migration
can be internal (within the country) or
international (between the countries).
Internal migration does not change the size
of the population, but influences the distribution
of population within the nation. Migration plays
a very significant role in changing the composition
and distribution of population.
Activity
On a map, trace the migration of each
of your grandparents and parents
since their birth. Try and analyse the
reasons for each move.

In India, most migrations have been from
rural to urban areas because of the “push”
factor in rural areas. These are adverse
conditions of poverty and unemployment in the
rural areas and the “pull” of the city in terms
of increased employment opportunities and
better living conditions.
Migration is an important determinant of
population change. It changes not only the
population size but also the population
composition of urban and rural populations
in terms of age and sex composition. In India,
the rural-urban migration has resulted in a
steady increase in the percentage of population
in cities and towns. The urban population has
increased from 17.29 per cent of the total
population in 1951 to 31.80 per cent in 2011.
There has been a significant increase in the
number of ‘million plus cities’ from 35 to 53 in
just one decade, i.e., 2001 to 2011.
Age Composition
The age composition of a population refers to
the number of people in different age groups
in a country. It is one of the most basic
characteristics of a population. To an important
degree, a person’s age influences what he/she
needs, buys, does and his/her capacity to
perform. Consequently, the number and
percentage of a population found within the
children, working age and aged groups are
notable determinants of the population’s social
and economic structure.
The population of a nation is, generally,
grouped into three broad categories:
Children (generally below 15 years)
They are economically unproductive and need
to be provided with food, clothing, education
and medical care.
Working Age (15–59 years)
They are economically productive and
biologically reproductive. They comprise the
working population.

58

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

India : Age Structure

Table 6.2 : India : Sex Ratio 1951-2011

Adults, 58.7%
Aged, 6.9%
Children, 34.4%

946
941
930
934
929
933
943

variations?

They can be economically productive though
they may have retired. They may be working
voluntarily but they are not available for
employment through recruitment.
The percentage of children and the aged
affect the dependency ratio because these
groups are not producers. The proportion of
the three groups in India’s population is
already presented in Figure 6.5 .

(iii)

1951
1961
1971
1981
1991
2001
2011

• What could be the reasons for such

Aged (Above 59 years)

(ii)

Sex ratio
(Females per 1000 males)

• Kerala has a sex ratio of 1084
females per 1000 males, Puducherry has 1038
females for every 1000 males, while Delhi has
only 866 females per 1000 males and Haryana
has just 877.

Figure 6.5: India: Age Composition

(i)

Census year

Activity :
How many children do you know who are
engaged as household helpers or labourers
in your locality?
How many adults do you know in your locality
who are unemployed?
What do you feel are the reasons for this?

Literacy Rates
Literacy is a very important quality of a
population. Obviously, only an informed and
educated citizen can make intelligent choices
and undertake research and development
projects. Low levels of literacy are a serious
obstacle for economic improvement.
According to the Census 2011, a person
aged 7 years and above, who can read and
write with understanding in any language, is
treated as literate.
There has been a steady improvement in
the literacy levels in India. The literacy rate in
the country as per the Census of 2011 is 73
per cent; 80.9 per cent for males and 64.6
per cent for females. Why do such differences
exist?

Sex Ratio
Sex ratio is defined as the number of females
per 1000 males in the population. This
information is an important social indicator
to measure the extent of equality between
males and females in a society at a given time.
The sex ratio in the country has always
remained unfavourable to females. Find out
why this is so? Table 6.2 shows the sex ratio
from 1951–2011.

Occupational Structure
The percentage of population that is
economically active is an important index of
development. The distribution of the population
according to different types of occupation is
referred to as the occupational structure. An
enormous variety of occupations are found in
any country. Occupations are, generally,
classified as primary, secondary and tertiary.

POPULATION

59

2021–22

Primary activities include agriculture,
animal husbandry, forestry, fishing, mining
and quarrying, etc. Secondary activities
include manufacturing industry, building
and construction work, etc. Tertiary activities
include transport, communications,
commerce, administration and other services.
The proportion of people working in
different activities varies in developed and
developing countries. Developed nations have
a high proportion of people in secondary, and
tertiary activities. Developing countries tend
to have a higher proportion of their workforce
engaged in primary activities. In India, about
64 per cent of the population is engaged only
in agriculture. The proportion of population
dependent on secondary and tertiary sectors
is about 13 and 20 per cent respectively.
There has been an occupational shift in favour
of secondary and tertiary sectors because of
growing industrialisation and urbanisation in
recent times.
Health
Health is an important component of
population composition, which affects the
process of development. Sustained efforts of
government programmes have registered
significant improvements in the health
conditions of the Indian population. Death
rates have declined from 25 per 1000
population in 1951 to 7.2 per 1000 in 2011
and life expectancy at birth has increased from
36.7 years in 1951 to 67.9 years in 2012.
The substantial improvement is the result
of many factors including improvement in
public health, prevention of infectious
diseases and application of modern medical
practices in diagnosis and treatment of
ailments.
Despite considerable achievements, the
health situation is a matter of major concern
for India. The per capita calorie consumption
is much below the recommended levels and
malnutrition afflicts a large percentage of our
population. Safe drinking water and basic

sanitation amenities are available to only
one-third of the rural population. These
problems need to be tackled through an
appropriate population policy.
Adolescent Population
The most significant feature of the Indian
population is the size of its adolescent
population. It constitutes one-fifth of the total
population of India. Adolescents are,
generally, grouped in the age group of 10 to
19 years. They are the most important
resource for the future.
Nutrition
requirements of adolescents are higher than
those of a normal child or adult. Poor nutrition
can lead to deficiency and stunted growth.
But in India, the diet available to adolescents
is inadequate in all nutrients. A large number
of adolescent girls suffer from anaemia. Their
problems have so far not received adequate
attention in the process of development. The
adolescent girls have to be sensitised to the
problems they confront. Awareness among
them can be improved through the spread of
literacy and education.
National Population Policy
Recognising that the planning of families
would improve individual health and
welfare, the Government of India initiated a
comprehensive Family Planning Programme
in 1952. The Family Welfare Programme has
sought to promote responsible and planned
parenthood on a voluntary basis. The National
Population Policy (NPP) 2000 is a
culmination of years of planned efforts.
The NPP 2000 provides a policy
framework for imparting free and compulsory
school education up to 14 years of age,
reducing infant mortality rate to below 30 per
1000 live births, achieving universal
immunisation of children against all vaccine
preventable diseases, promoting delayed
marriage for girls, and making family welfare
a people-centred programme.

60

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

NPP 2000 and Adolescents

delayed marriage and child-bearing,
education of adolescents about the risks of
unprotected sex, making contraceptive
services accessible and affordable, providing
food supplements, nutritional services, and
strengthening legal measures to prevent child
marriage.
People are the nation’s most valuable
resource. A well-educated healthy population
provides potential power.

NPP 2000 identified adolescents as one of the
major section of the population that need
greater attention. Besides nutritional
requirements, the policy puts greater
emphasis on other important needs of
adolescent including protection from
unwanted pregnancies and sexually
transmitted diseases (STDs). It called for
programmes that aim towards encouraging

EXERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Migrations change the number, distribution and composition of the
population in
(a) the area of departure

(c) both the area of departure and arrival

(b) the area of arrival

(d) none of the above

(ii) A large proportion of children in a population is a result of
(a) high birth rates

(c) high death rates

(b) high life expectancies

(d) more married couples

(iii) The magnitude of population growth refers to
(a) the total population of an area
(b) the number of persons added each year
(c)

the rate at which the population increases

(d) the number of females per thousand males
(iv) According to the Census, a “literate” person is one who
(a) can read and write his/her name
(b) can read and write any language
(c)

is 7 years old and can read and write any language with understanding

(d) knows the 3 ‘R’s (reading, writing, arithmetic)
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) Why is the rate of population growth in India declining since 1981?
(ii) Discuss the major components of population growth.
(iii) Define age structure, death rate and birth rate.
(iv) How is migration a determinant factor of population change?
3. Distinguish between population growth and population change.
4. What is the relation between occupational structure and development?
5. What are the advantages of having a healthy population?
6. What are the significant features of the National Population Policy 2000?

POPULATION

61

2021–22

PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Conduct a class census by preparing a questionnaire. The questionnaire should contain
minimum five questions. Questions should relate to students, their family members, their
class performance, their health, etc. Each student is required to fill in the questionnaire.
Compile the information in numerical terms (in terms of percentage). Present the information
through pie-chart, bar-diagram or in any other way.

62

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

GLOSSARY
Adolescence

Alluvial plain
Base population
Biome
Birth rate
Depression

Death rate
Density of population
Dependency ratio
Ecosystem
Environment

Fault
Fauna
Flora
Fold
Geosyncline

Glacier
Growth rate of population

Indian mainland
Indian Standard Time
Inland drainage

: Adolescence is a period in which a person is no longer a child and
not yet an adult. Such persons are grouped in the age group of
10 to 19 years.
: A level tract of land made up of alluvium or fine rock material
brought down by a river.
: The total population of an area at the beginning of a given time
period.
: Plant communities occuring in distinct groups in areas having
similar climatic conditions.
: The number of live births for every 1000 persons in a year.
: In meteorology; it denotes an area of relatively low atmospheric
pressure, which is found mainly in temperate regions. In geology,
it refers to a hollow sunken area of the earth’s surface.
: The number of deaths per 1000 persons in year.
: The average number of persons per unit area, such as a square
kilometre.
: The ratio of people of dependent age (below 15 and above 60 years)
to people of economically active ages (15-59 years).
: A system which comprises the physical environment and the
organisms living therein.
: Surroundings or the conditions under which a person or thing
exists and develops his or its character. It covers both physical
and cultural elements.
: A linear break in rocks of the earth’s crust along which there has
been displacement in a horizontal, vertical or oblique direction.
: The animal life of a given area.
: The total vegetation or plant cover of a region.
: A bend in the rock strata resulting from compression of an area of
the earth’s crust.
: A narrow, shallow, elongated basin with a sinking bottom in which
a considerable thickness of sediments was deposited by the rivers
coming from Angara and Gondwanaland.
: A mass of snow and ice that moves slowly under the influence of
gravity along a confined course away from its place of accumulation.
: The growth rate of population indicates the rate at which the
population is growing. In estimating the growth rate the increase
in population is compared with the base population. It can be
measured annually or over a decade.
: It refers to the contiguous stretch of landmass from Jammu and
Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh.
: The local time along the Standard Meridian of India (82°30'E).
: A drainage system in which the waters of the rivers do not reach
the oceans but fall into an inland sea or lake.

2021–22

Igneous rocks
Lagoon
Lake
Lithospheric plates
Life expectancy
Local time
Metamorphic rocks

Migration

Million plus cities
Monsoon
Mountain
National park
Plain
Plateau
Plate tectonics
Relief
Subsidence
Sedimentary rocks
Sex-ratio
Subcontinent
Tectonic
Young mountains

: Rocks formed as a result of solidification of magma either below
the earth’s surface or above it.
: A salt-water lake separated from the sea by the sandbars and spits.
: A body of water that lies in a hollow in the earth’s surface and is
entirely surrounded by land.
: Large segments of the earth’s crust composed of continental and
oceanic lithospheric parts, floating above the asthenosphere.
: The average number of years one is expected to live.
: The time of a place determined by the midday sun is called the
local time.
: Deformation and alteration of pre-existing igneous and
sedimentary rocks as a result of changes in physical and chemical
conditions due to intense heat or pressure.
: Movement of people from one place to another. Internal migration
means movement of people within a country and external migration
means movement of people between countries. When people come
to a country from another country, it is called immigration and
when they leave that country, it is called emigration.
: Cities with a population of more than one million or 10 lakh.
: A complete reversal of winds over a large area leading to a change
of seasons.
: An upward projected features of the earth’s surface that rises to
high altitude and usually possesses steep slopes.
: A reserved area for preserving its natural vegetation, wildlife and
the natural environment.
: An extensive area of flat or gently undulating land.
: An extensive elevated area of relatively flat land.
: The scientific concept that explains the movements of the crustal
plates.
: The differences in elevation or the physical outline of the land
surface or ocean floor.
: In meteorology, it is the downward movement of the air. In geology,
it refers to the sinking of a portion of the earth’s surface.
: Rocks composed of sediments and generally having a layered
structure.
: Sex-ratio is defined as the number of females per thousand males.
: A big landmass, which stands out as a distinct geographical unit
from the rest of the continent.
: Forces originating within the earth and responsible for bringing
widespread changes in the landform features.
: The fold mountains formed during the most recent major phase
of folding in the earth’s crust.

64

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

Notes

2021–22

Notes

2021–22

