3

DRAINAGE

T

he term drainage describes the river
system of an area. Look at the physical
map. You will notice that small streams
flowing from different directions come together
to form the main river, which ultimately drains
into a large water body such as a lake or a sea
or an ocean. The area drained by a single river
system is called a drainage basin. A closer
observation on a map will indicate that any
elevated area, such as a mountain or an upland,
separates two drainage basins. Such an upland
is known as a water divide (Figure 3.1).

mA
am
treea
S
Sr

BB
am
m
treea
S
Sr

W
at

er

Di

vi
de

DRAINAGE SYSTEMS IN INDIA
The drainage systems of India are mainly
controlled by the broad relief features of the
subcontinent. Accordingly, the Indian rivers
are divided into two major groups:
• the Himalayan rivers; and
• the Peninsular rivers.
Apart from originating from the two major
physiographic regions of India, the Himalayan
and the Peninsular rivers are different from
each other in many ways. Most of the
Himalayan rivers are perennial. It means
that they have water throughout the year.
These rivers receive water from rain as well
as from melted snow from the lofty
mountains. The two major Himalayan rivers,
the Indus and the Brahmaputra originate
from the north of the mountain ranges. They
have cut through the mountains making
gorges. The Himalayan rivers have long
courses from their source to the sea.

Figure 3.1 : Water Divide

The world’s largest drainage
basin is of the Amazon river

• Which river has the largest basin in India?
Figure 3.2 : A Gorge

2021–22

They perform intensive erosional activity in
their upper courses and carry huge loads of
silt and sand. In the middle and the lower
courses, these rivers form meanders, oxbow
lakes, and many other depositional features
in their floodplains. They also have welldeveloped deltas (Figure 3.3).

The Himalayan Rivers
The major Himalayan rivers are the Indus, the
Ganga and the Brahmaputra. These rivers are
long, and are joined by many large and
important tributaries. A river alongwith its
tributaries may be called a river system.
The Indus River System
The river Indus rises in Tibet, near Lake
Mansarowar. Flowing west, it enters India in the
Ladakh. It forms a picturesque gorge in this
part. Several tributaries, the Zaskar, the Nubra,
the Shyok and the Hunza, join it in the Kashmir
region. The Indus flows through Baltistan and
Gilgit and emerges from the mountains at Attock.
The Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and
the Jhelum join together to enter the Indus near
Mithankot in Pakistan. Beyond this, the Indus
flows southwards eventually reaching the
Arabian Sea, east of Karachi. The Indus plain
has a very gentle slope. With a total length of
2900 km, the Indus is one of the longest rivers
of the world. A little over a third of the Indus
basin is located in India Ladakh, Jammu and
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab and the
rest is in Pakistan.

Source of River
Upper Course

Middle Course

Meander
Ox-Bow Lake

Lower
Course

Delta

Figure 3.3 : Some Features Made by Rivers

A large number of the Peninsular rivers are
seasonal, as their flow is dependent on rainfall.
During the dry season, even the large rivers
have reduced flow of water in their channels.
The Peninsular rivers have shorter and
shallower courses as compared to their
Himalayan counterparts. However, some of
them originate in the central highlands and flow
towards the west. Can you identify two such
large rivers? Most of the rivers of peninsular
India originate in the Western Ghats and flow
towards the Bay of Bengal.

• According to the regulations
of the Indus Water Treaty (1960), India can
use only 20 per cent of the total water carried by
the Indus river system. This water is used for
irrigation in Punjab, Haryana and the southern
and the western parts of Rajasthan.

The Ganga River System
The headwaters of the Ganga, called the
‘Bhagirathi’ is fed by the Gangotri Glacier and
joined by the Alaknanda at Devaprayag in
Uttarakhand. At Haridwar, the Ganga emerges
from the mountains on to the plains.

18

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

Figure 3.4 : Major Rivers and Lakes

DRAINAGE

19

2021–22

the northernmost point of the Ganga delta. The
river bifurcates here; the Bhagirathi-Hooghly
(a distributary) flows southwards through the
deltaic plains to the Bay of Bengal. The
mainstream, flows southwards into
Bangladesh and is joined by the Brahmaputra.
Further downstream, it is known as the
Meghna. This mighty river, with waters from
the Ganga and the Brahmaputra, flows into
the Bay of Bengal. The delta formed by these
rivers is known as the Sundarban Delta.
Figure 3.5 : Confluence of Bhagirathi and Alaknanda at
Devaprayag

The Ganga is joined by many tributaries
from the Himalayas, a few of them being major
rivers, such as the Yamuna, the Ghaghara, the
Gandak and the Kosi. The river Yamuna rises
from the Yamunotri Glacier in the Himalayas.
It flows parallel to the Ganga and as a right
bank tributary meets the Ganga at Allahabad.
The Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi rise
in the Nepal Himalaya. They are the rivers,
which flood parts of the northern plains every
year, causing widespread damage to life and
property, whereas, they enrich the soil for
agricultural use.
The main tributaries, which come from the
peninsular uplands, are the Chambal, the
Betwa and the Son. These rise from semi-arid
areas, have shorter courses and do not carry
much water in them. Find out where and how
they ultimately join the Ganga.

• The Namami Gange Programme
is an Integrated Conservation Mission approved as
a ‘flagship programme’ by the Union Government
in June 2014 to accomplish the twin objectives of
effective abatement of pollution, conservation and
rejuvenation of the national river, Ganga. You may
explore about this project at http://nmcg.nic.in/
NamamiGanga.sspx#

• The Sundarban Delta derived
its name from the Sundari tree, which grows well
in marshland.
• It is the world’s largest and fastest growing delta.
It is also the home of Royal Bengal tiger.

The length of the Ganga is over 2500 km.
Look at Figure 3.4; can you identify the type of
drainage pattern formed by the Ganga river
system? Ambala is located on the water divide
between the Indus and the Ganga river systems.
The plains from Ambala to the Sunderban
stretch over nearly 1800 km, but the fall in its
slope is hardly 300 metres. In other words, there
is a fall of just one metre for every 6 km.
Therefore, the river develops large meanders.
The Brahmaputra River System
The Brahmaputra rises in Tibet east of
Mansarowar lake very close to the sources of
the Indus and the Satluj. It is slightly longer
than the Indus, and most of its course lies
outside India. It flows eastwards parallel to
the Himalayas. On reaching the Namcha
Barwa (7757 m), it takes a ‘U’ turn and enters
India in Arunachal Pradesh through a gorge.
Here, it is called the Dihang and it is joined by
the Dibang, the Lohit, and many other
tributaries to form the Brahmaputra in Assam.

Enlarged with the waters from its right and
left bank tributaries, the Ganga flows
eastwards till Farakka in West Bengal. This is

20

• Brahmaputra is known as
the Tsang Po in Tibet and Jamuna in Bangladesh.

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

In Tibet, the river carries a smaller volume of
water and less silt as it is a cold and a dry area.
In India, it passes through a region of high
rainfall. Here the river carries a large volume of
water and considerable amount of silt. The
Brahmaputra has a braided channel in its entire
length in Assam and forms many riverine islands.
Do you remember the name of the world’s largest
riverine island formed by the Brahmaputra?
Every year during the rainy season, the
river overflows its banks, causing widespread
devastation due to floods in Assam and
Bangladesh. Unlike other north Indian rivers,
the Brahmaputra is marked by huge deposits
of silt on its bed causing the riverbed to rise.
The river also shifts its channel frequently.
The Peninsular Rivers
The main water divide in Peninsular India is
formed by the Western Ghats, which runs from
north to south close to the western coast. Most
of the major rivers of the Peninsula, such as
the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and
the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain into the
Bay of Bengal. These rivers make deltas at
their mouths. There are numerous small
streams flowing west of the Western Ghats.
The Narmada and the Tapi are the only long
rivers, which flow west and make esturies. The
drainage basins of the peninsular rivers are
comparatively smaller in size.
The Narmada Basin
The Narmada rises in the Amarkantak hills
in Madhya Pradesh. It flows towards the west
in a rift valley formed due to faulting. On its
way to the sea, the Narmada creates many
picturesque locations. The ‘Marble rocks’,
near Jabalpur, where the Narmada flows
through a deep gorge, and the ‘Dhuadhar
falls, where the river plunges over steep rocks,
are some of the notable ones.

• The Narmada river
conservation mission has been undertaken by the
government of Madhya Pradesh by a scheme named
Namami Devi Narmade. You may visit their website.
http://www.namamidevinarmade.mp.gov.in to
learn more about it.

All tributaries of the Narmada are very short
and most of these join the main stream at right
angles. The Narmada basin covers parts of
Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat.
The Tapi Basin
The Tapi rises in the Satpura ranges, in the
Betul district of Madhya Pradesh. It also flows
in a rift valley parallel to the Narmada but it is
much shorter in length. Its basin covers parts
of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra.
The coastal plains between Western Ghats
and the Arabian Sea are very narrow. Hence,
the coastal rivers are short. The main west
flowing rivers are Sabarmati, Mahi,
Bharathpuzha and Periyar. Find out the states
in which these rivers drain the water.
The Godavari Basin
The Godavari is the largest Peninsular river. It
rises from the slopes of the Western Ghats in
the Nasik district of Maharashtra. Its length is
about 1500 km. It drains into the Bay of Bengal.
Its drainage basin is also the largest among the
peninsular rivers. The basin covers parts of
Maharashtra (about 50 per cent of the basin
area lies in Maharashtra), Madhya Pradesh,
Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. The Godavari is
joined by a number of tributaries, such as the
Purna, the Wardha, the Pranhita, the Manjra,
the Wainganga and the Penganga. The last three
tributaries are very large. Because of its length
and the area it covers, it is also known as the
Dakshin Ganga.
The Mahanadi Basin
The Mahanadi rises in the highlands of
Chhattisgarh. It flows through Odisha to reach

DRAINAGE

21

2021–22

the Bay of Bengal. The length of the river is
about 860 km. Its drainage basin is shared by
Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
and Odisha.
The Krishna Basin
Rising from a spring near Mahabaleshwar, the
Krishna flows for about 1400 km and reaches
the Bay of Bengal. The Tungabhadra, the
Koyana, the Ghatprabha, the Musi and the
Bhima are some of its tributaries. Its drainage
basin is shared by Maharasthra, Karnataka
and Andhra Pradesh.
The Kaveri Basin
The Kaveri rises in the Brahmagri range of the
Western Ghats and it reaches the Bay of Bengal
in south of Cuddalore in Tamil Nadu. The total
length of the river is about 760 km. Its main
tributaries are Amravati, Bhavani, Hemavati
and Kabini. Its basin drains parts of Karnataka,
Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
• The river Kaveri makes the
second biggest waterfall in India, known as
Shivasamudram Falls. The hydroelectric power
generated from the falls is supplied to Mysuru,
Bengaluru and the Kolar Gold Field.
•

The name of the biggest waterfall

in India.

Besides these major rivers, there are some
smaller rivers flowing towards the east. The
Damoder, the Brahmani, the Baitarni and the
Subarnrekha are some notable examples.
Locate them in your atlas.
• 71 per cent of the world’s
surface is covered with water, but 97 per cent of
that is salt water.
• Of the 3 per cent that is available as freshwater,
three quarters of it is trapped as ice.

Imagine that if Srinagar, Nainital and other
tourists places did not have a lake would they
have been as attractive as they are today? Have
you ever tried to know the importance of lakes
in making a place attractive to tourists? Apart
from attraction for tourists, lakes are also useful
to human beings in many ways.
• Lakes of large extent are called seas,
like the Caspian, the Dead and the Aral seas.

India has many lakes. These differ from
each other in size and other characteristics.
Most lakes are permanent; some contain water
only during the rainy season, like the lakes in
the basins of inland drainage of semi-arid
regions. There are some lakes which are the
result of the action of glaciers and ice sheets,
while others have been formed by wind, river
action and human activities.
A meandering river across a floodplain
forms cut-offs that later develops into ox-bow
lakes. Spits and bars form lagoons in the
coastal areas, e.g. the Chilika lake, the Pulicat
lake and the Kolleru lake. Lakes in the region
of inland drainage are sometimes seasonal; for
example, the Sambhar lake in Rajasthan, which
is a salt water lake. Its water is used for
producing salt.
Most of the freshwater lakes are in the
Himalayan region. They are of glacial origin.
In other words, they formed when glaciers
dug out a basin, which was later filled with
snowmelt. The Wular lake in Jammu and
Kashmir, in contrast, is the result of tectonic
activity. It is the largest freshwater lake in
India. The Dal lake, Bhimtal, Nainital, Loktak
and Barapani are some other important
freshwater lakes.

LAKES
You may be familiar with the valley of Kashmir
and the famous Dal Lake, the house boats and
shikaras, which attract thousands of tourists
every year. Similarly, you may have visited
some other tourist spot near a lake and enjoyed
boating, swimming and other water games.
22

Figure 3.6 : Loktak Lake

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

Apart from natural lakes, the damming of
the rivers for the generation of hydel power has
also led to the formation of lakes, such as Guru
Gobind Sagar (Bhakra Nangal Project).

National River Conservation Plan
(NRCP)

The river cleaning programme in the
country was initiated with the launching
of the Ganga Action Plan (GAP)
in 1985. The Ganga Action Plan was
expanded to cover other rivers under the
National River Conservation Plan
(NRCP) in the year 1995. The objective
of the NRCP is to improve the water
quality of the rivers, which are major
water sources in the country, through
the implementation of pollultion
abatement work.
Source: http://nrcd.nic.in/nrcp.pd as on
25.07.17

Activity
Make a list of natural and artificial
lakes with the help of the atlas.

Lakes are of great value to human beings.
A lake helps to regulate the flow of a river.
During heavy rains, it prevents flooding and
during the dry season, it helps to maintain
an even flow of water. Lakes can also be used
for developing hydel power. They moderate the
climate of the surroundings; maintain the
aquatic ecosystem, enhance natural beauty,
help develop tourism and provide recreation.

ROLE OF RIVERS IN THE ECONOMY
Rivers have been of fundamental importance
throughout the human history. Water from
rivers is a basic natural resource, essential
for various human activities. Therefore,
riverbanks have attracted settlers from ancient
times. These settlements have now become big
cities. Make a list of cities in your state which
are located on the bank of a river.
Using rivers for irrigation, navigation,
hydro-power generation is of special
significance — particularly to a country like
India, where agriculture is the major source
of livelihood of the majority of its population.

RIVER POLLUTION
The growing domestic, municipal, industrial
and agricultural demand for water from rivers
naturally affects the quality of water. As a

result, more and more water is being drained
out of the rivers reducing their volume. On the
other hand, a heavy load of untreated sewage
and industrial effluents are emptied into the
rivers. This affects not only the quality of water
but also the self-cleansing capacity of the river.
For example, given the adequate streamflow,
the Ganga water is able to dilute and assimilate
pollution loads within 20 km of large cities.
But the increasing urbanisation and
industrialisation do not allow it to happen and
the pollution level of many rivers has been
rising. Concern over rising pollution in our
rivers led to the launching of various action
plans to clean the rivers. Have you heard about
such action plans? How does our health get
affected by polluted river water? Think about
“life of human beings without fresh water”.
Arrange a debate on this topic in the class.

EXERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) In which of the following states is the Wular lake located?
(a) Rajasthan
(c) Punjab
(b) Uttar Pradesh
(d) Jammu and Kashmir

DRAINAGE

23

2021–22

(ii) The river Narmada has its source at
(a) Satpura

(c) Amarkantak

(b) Brahmagiri

(d) Slopes of the Western Ghats

(iii) Which one of the following lakes is a salt water lake?
(a) Sambhar

(c) Wular

(b) Dal

(d) Gobind Sagar

(iv) Which one of the following is the longest river of the Peninsular India?
(a) Narmada

(c) Godavari

(b) Krishna

(d) Mahanadi

(v) Which one amongst the following rivers flows through a rift valley?
(a) Mahanadi

(c) Krishna

(b) Tungabhadra

(d) Tapi

2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) What is meant by a water divide? Give an example.
(ii) Which is the largest river basin in India?
(iii) Where do the rivers Indus and Ganga have their origin?
(iv) Name the two headstreams of the Ganga. Where do they meet to form the Ganga?
(v) Why does the Brahmaputra in its Tibetan part have less silt, despite a
longer course?
(vi) Which two Peninsular rivers flow through trough?
(vii) State some economic benefits of rivers and lakes.
3. Below are given names of a few lakes of India. Group them under two categories
– natural and created by human beings.
(a)

Wular

(b)

Dal

(c)

Nainital

(d)

Bhimtal

(e)

Gobind Sagar

(g)
(i)
(k)
(m)

(f)

Loktak

Barapani

(h)

Chilika

Sambhar

(j)

Rana Pratap Sagar

Nizam Sagar

(l)

Pulicat

Nagarjuna Sagar

(n)

Hirakund

4. Discuss the significant difference between the Himalayan and the Peninsular
rivers.
5. Compare the east flowing and the west flowing rivers of the Peninsular plateau.
6. Why are rivers important for the country’s economy?
Map Skills
(i)

On an outline map of India mark and label the following rivers: Ganga,
Satluj, Damodar, Krishna, Narmada, Tapi, Mahanadi, and Brahmaputra.

(ii)

On an outline map of India mark and label the following lakes: Chilika,
Sambhar, Wular, Pulicat, Kolleru.

24

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

2021–22

Project/Activity
Solve this crossword puzzle with the help of given clues.
Across
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Nagarjuna Sagar is a river valley project. Name the river?
The longest river of India.
The river which originates from a place known as Beas Kund.
The river which rises in the Betul district of MP and flows westwards.
The river which was known as the “Sorrow” of West Bengal.
The river on which the reservoir for Indira Gandhi Canal has been built.
The river whose source lies near Rohtang Pass.
The longest river of Peninsular India?

Down
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

A tributary of Indus originating from Himachal Pradesh.
The river flowing through fault, drains into the Arabian Sea.
A river of south India, which receives rainwater both in summer and winter.
A river which flows through Ladakh, Gilgit and Pakistan.
An important river of the Indian desert.
The river which joins Chenab in Pakistan.
A river which rises at Yamunotri glacier.

DRAINAGE

25

2021–22

