Short Answer Type Questions-II
Q. 1. Compare photosynthesis with chemosynthesis.
Ans.
S. No.

Photosynthesis

Chemosynthesis

(i)

Photosynthesis
occurs in sunlight.

It occurs day and
night both.

(ii)

Light is necessary.

Light is not
necessary.

(iii)

Photosynthetic
bacteria have bacterio-chlorophyll
which help in trapping
the solar energy and
converting it into
chemical energy.

The energy required
for synthesis of food
is obtained by
oxidizing chemical
substances found in
the surrounding
medium.

Q. 2. Distinguish between autotrophic and heterotrophic bacteria.
Ans.
S. No.
(i)

(ii)
(iii)

Autotrophic
Bacteria
The bacteria synthe-sise their own
food.

Heterotrophic Bacteria

They depend on an external sources
of energy for synthesis of food.
Autotrophic bacteria live on inorganic
substrata.

An external source of energy is not
required.
Heterotrophic Bacteria live on organic
substratum Or living host.

The bacteria obtain organic food or
organic growth factors from outside
sources.

Q. 3. Give the important features of Protozoa.
Ans. (i) They are microscopic unicellular organisms with varied forms and shapes.
(ii) They lack cell wall.
(iii) Locomotion occurs by pseudopodia, flagella and cilia.
(iv) They Show heterotrophic mode of nutrition which may be holozoic, parasitic or saprobic.

(v) These reproduces asexually by binary fission.
Q. 4. Draw a well labelled diagram to show E.M view of a cyanobacterial cell.
Ans.

Q. 5. What are chemoautotrophic bacteria? How they obtain energy+?
Ans. Chemoautotrophic Bacteria : (i) They are bacteria which are able to manufacture
their organic food from inorganic raw materials with the help of energy derived from
exergonic chemical reactions involving oxidation of an inorganic substance present in the
external medium.
(ii) The chemical energy obtained from oxidation reaction is trapped in ATP molecules
(iii) For example, nitrifying bacteria, sulphur oxidizing bacteria and iron bacteria.
Q.6. Write a short note on Mycoplasma.
Ans. (i) Mycoplasma are the simplest unicellular prokaryotes.
(ii) They are often called as PPLO (pleuropneumonia like organisms).
(iii) They occur in soil, sewage, human and plants.
(iv) Plasma membrane is present.
(v) Due to absence of cell wall they can change their shape easily
(vi) They lack organised nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, plastids, mitochondria, golgi
bodies, lysosomes. etc.
(vii) A single naked DNA duplex lies coiled in the cytoplasm.
(viii) They cause several diseases such as Pneumonia in man and animals.

Q.7. Write a brief note on the economic importance of bacteria.
Ans. (i) Bacteria are very important for humans. They causes decay and decomposition of
dead bodies of plants and animals, so they help in cleaning the earth.
(ii) They fix atmospheric N2 into nitrates, lactic acid bacteria convert milk sugar lactose into
lactic acid.
(iii) They convert ethyl alcohol into vinegar, produces butyl alcohol and acetone.
(iv) A number of antibiotics are obtained from mycelial bacterium like streptomycin from
Streptomyces bacterium.
Q.8. What are hormogonia ? Give one examples of cyanobacteria which reproduce by
binary fission.
Ans.(i) Hormogonia are motile filaments of cells formed by some cyanobacteria.
(ii) They are formed during asexual reproduction unicellular, filamentous cyanobacteria.
(iii) The thick walled hormongonium is referred to as hormocyst. Hormocysts are helpful in
reproduction.
(iv) Unicellular cyanobacteria which reproduce binary fission is Chroococcus.
Q.9. What are the economic importance of diatoms ?
Ans. (i) Diatoms are an important source of food to aquatic animals.
(ii) Diatomite is porous and chemically inert, therefore used in filtration of sugar, alcohols and
antibiotics.
(iii) It is also employed as a cleansing agent in tooth pastes and metal polishes.
(iv) It is also employed as insulation material in refrigerators, boilers and furnaces.

