HOTS (Higher Order Thinking Skills)

Q.1. Why War didn’t happen during Cold War?
Ans. Due to the theory of deterrence.
Q.2. Why did smaller states in the alliance link themselves on any of the
superpowers?
Ans. Self-protection and to limit the authority of other superpower.
Q.3. What was the need of land-area of smaller countries to superpowers?
Ans. To make the land area as base for the operation of their weapons and their
military.
Q.4. What was the greatest need of non-aligned countries?
Ans. They needed to be economically more developed and improve the living standards
of people by bringing them above poverty line.
Q.5. What was the major change in nature of non-alignment?
Ans. Economic issues received more importance.
Q.6. Why did Indian government sign the treaty with Soviet Union in 1971?
Ans. India needed diplomatic and possible military support during the Bangladesh
crisis.
Q.7. Why did both the blocs have huge stock of weapons during the Cold War?
Ans. Cold War did not eliminate rivalries between the two alliances, mutual suspicions
led them to arm themselves to the teeth and to constantly prepare for war. Huge stock
of arms was considered necessary for the prevention of occurrence of war.
Q.8. What were the changes in Global politics after the Second World War?
Ans. After the Second World War, two new power rose on the global stage. With the
defeat of Germany and Japan, the devastation of Europe and in many other parts of the
world, the United States and USSR became the greatest powers in the world with the
ability to influence events anywhere on earth. The two superpowers were keen on
expanding their sphere of influence in different parts of the world. The world was visibly
divided between the two alliance systems.
Q.9. What was the Chief reason behind the Cold War?
Ans. The superpowers emerged in the world after the Second World War. Both the
countries wanted to take over the lead and this was the major cause for the Cold War.

Both the superpowers had strong nuclear weapons. Both could have harmed each other
in the case of a war.
Q.10. What was the position of America in terms of global politics after the
Second World War?
Ans. America was a strong country after the Second World War. It had created its
position as a superpower in global politics. Another superpower of the world was Soviet
Union, who promoted communism. America established ‘North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation’ by forming western alliance into an organisation in 1949. A foreign policy
which aimed at stopping the promotion of communism in these countries was
determined.
Q.11. What were the reasons of starting/beginning of NAM?
Ans. The whole world was divided into two camps after the Second World War and
there was a competition between the superpowers to lead in weapons. Some newly
independent countries wanted to maintain their independent existence by not involving
in any of the blocs. That’s why, they got united and adopted the policy of non-alignment.
As time passed by, other countries also started joining them.
Q.12. What challenges did the countries of non-aligned movement face?
Ans. Maximum countries involved in NAM were newly independent countries and thus
they had to face two challenges:
(i) To develop their countries economically
(ii) To eliminate widespread poverty in the country.
Q.13. Clarify the role played by non-aligned countries in reducing cold war
conflicts and averting grave crises.
Ans. The non-aligned countries played a very important role in reducing Cold War
conflicts and averting some grave crises. Their contribution cannot be ignored.
Jawaharlal Nehru – One of the key leaders of the NAM – played a crucial role in
mediating between the two Koreas. In the Congo Crisis, the UN Secretary – General
played a key mediatory role.
Q.14. What was India’s response to the ongoing Cold War in two folds as the
leader of NAM?
Ans. As a leader of NAM, India’s response to the ongoing Cold War was two-fold:
(i) It strongly and vigilantly stayed away from the two alliances.
(ii) It raised its voice against the newly decolonised countries becoming a part of these
alliances.

Q.15. Why didn’t Cold War turn into bloody war in spite of rivalry between both
the superpowers?
Ans. Both the superpowers, America and Soviet Union had the capacity to completely
destroy each other as they had enough nuclear weapons. This situation of ‘deterrence’
forced both the superpowers and then supporting countries to behave rationally and
responsibly. They reacted like this because both of them knew the real consequences
of war. Direct war could be highly destructive. Thus, the relation between both of them
had deterrence relation. They behaved rationally to save the world from one another
World War. Cold War and deterrence saved human lives during active confrontation of
Cold War between both the superpowers.
Q.16. Suppose there had been no Cold War, how would that situation have
affected India’s foreign policy?
[CBSE (AI) 2015]
Ans. If the Cold War had not taken place, it would have affected Indian foreign policy in
the following manners:
(i) India would have retained the adopted independent foreign policy.
(ii) Since the rivalry between many major powers would have increased hatred and
enmity, India would have been compelled to join the arms race to become a strong
nation to defend its independence and sovereignty.
(iii) Indian would have become a superpower in Asia because of her large territory,
human resource and strategic location.
Q.17. Why did smaller countries decide to link themselves with any of the
superpowers?
Ans. Two Superpowers were keen on expanding their spheres of influence in different
parts of the world. The world was sharply divided between the two alliance systems, a
state was supposed to remain tied to its protective superpower to limit the influence of
the other superpower and its allies. The smaller states in the alliances used the link to
the superpowers for their own purposes. They got the promise of protection, weapons
and economic aid against their local rivals (mostly they had rivalries). For these
reasons, smaller states decided to join hands with these superpowers.
Q.18. What was India’s own benefit in Non-Alignment Policy?
Ans. A non-aligned stand served India’s interests in two ways:
(i) Non-alignment allowed India to take international decisions and stances that served
its interests rather than the interests of the super powers and their allies.

(ii) India was often able to balance one super power against the other. If India had felt
ignored or unduly pressurised by one of the superpowers, it could have tilted towards
the other. Neither alliance system could take India for granted or bully it.
Q.19. Why did India distance itself from the two camps, led by the US and the
Soviet Union? Explain.
[CBSE (AI) 2015]
Ans. India distanced itself from both the camps led by the US and USSR
(i) To serve its national interests rather than the interests of the Super Powers.
Nonalignment allowed India to take international decisions and stances.
(ii) To upkeep the sovereignty of the nation and to take independent decisions. India
was often able to balance one superpower against the other. If India felt ignored or
unduly pressurised by one superpower, it could tilt towards the other. Neither alliance
system could take India for granted or bully it.
(iii) To follow and advocate the policy of Non-Alignment
Q.20. How did non-alignment come into existence? Why did newly independent
decide to link themselves to NAM?
Ans. The Cold War began when the whole world was divided into two camps. At that
time, emergence of non-alignment was an eminent event. The policy of non-alignment
tried to eliminate the increasing effect of the Cold War.The countries involved in nonalignment movement contributed in maintaining world peace by staying away from
communism and capitalism. The following factors motivated newly independent to get
involved in NAM:
(i) These countries wanted their overall development by being independent and away
from any alignment.
(ii) These countries refused to join superpowers because they knew that they would
have to follow rules of that bloc.
(iii) They would get involved in the competition of weapons by joining alliance and thus
world peace would be hampered.
(iv) They could help dependent nations only by staying neutral. All these reasons
attracted newly independent nations to join NAM and number of members increased
from 25 in Belgrade Summit (1961) to 120 in 2014.
Q.21. Non alignment policy should not be equated with the policy of isolation. Do
you agree with the above statement? Support your stand with two suitable
arguments.
[CBSE Sample Paper 2016]

Ans. Yes, I agree that non alignment policy should not be equated with the policy of
isolation because firstly, non alignment allows a country to maintain equidistant relations
with super powers. Secondly, the policy of keeping away from alliances cannot be
termed as ‘isolationism.’ ‘neutrality’. Non-Alignment is not isolationism. Isolationism
means to keep aloof from global affairs. Isolationism was part of US foreign policy after
the American War of Independence (1787) till the origin of First World War. In contrast
non-aligned countries including India have played an active and vibrant role in
mediating the cause of peace and stability between the two cold war rivals. Their
strength stemmed from the need to remain united and their resolve to pursue nonalignment despite the attempt by the two hostile camps to take these countries in their
alliance system.
Q.22. The Cold War gave birth to the processes, accumulation of weapons and
control of weapons. What were the reasons behind these processes?
[NCERT]
Ans. old War began in the world after 1945. During Cold War, both the superpowers
tried to gain lead in terms of weapons and powers. The alliance systems led by the two
superpowers, therefore, threatened to divide the entire world into two camps. This
division happened first in Europe. Most countries of Western Europe sided with the US
and those of Eastern Europe joined the Soviet Camp. That is why these were also
called the (western) and the (eastern) alliances. The western alliance was formalised
into an organisation, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), which came into
existence in April 1949. It was an association of 12 states which declared that armed
attack on any one of them in Europe or North America would be regarded as an attack
on all of them. Each of these states would be obliged to help the other.
The eastern alliance, known as the ‘Warsaw Pact’, was led by Soviet Union. It was
created in 1955 and its principal function was to counter NATO’s forces in Europe. On
the initiative of Non-alliance Nations, US and USSR decided to collaborate in limiting or
eliminating certain kinds of nuclear and non-nuclear weapons. A stable balance of
weapons, they decided, could be maintained through ‘arms control’. Starting in the
1960s, the two sides signed three significant agreements within a decade. There were
the Limited Test Ban Treaty, Nuclear non-proliferation Treaty and Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty. Thereafter, the superpowers held several rounds of arms limitation talks and
signed several more treaties to limit their arms.
Q.23. Why was the end of the Second World War considered to be the beginning
of Cold War? Explain.
[CBSE (AI) 2016]
Ans. Factors responsible for the beginning of Cold War.
(i) Emergence of USSR as the most powerful country.

(ii) Use of Atom Bombs by USA against Japan.
(iii) Ideological rivalry between the two super powers.
(iv) The two super powers were keen on expanding their spheres.
(v) Use of Nuclear power raised many questions and comments like why did USA drop
Bombs?
(vi) Bombing the two cities of Japan.
Q.24. Sometimes it is said that the cold war was simple struggle for power and
that any ideology had nothing to do with it. Do you agree with this? Give an
example to support your position.
[NCERT]
Ans. No, I don’t agree with this statement. It wasn’t only the struggle to lead between
two blocs that formed as result of Second World War but also the ideological conflicts
between them that continued. The ideological conflicts were regarding the most
appropriate principal to maintain political, economical and social stability in the whole
world – whether communism or Capitalism? The leader of western alliance was
America and supported Capitalism. Soviet Union was the leader of Eastern alliance
which was committed to ideology of communism. After the disintegration of Soviet
Union, importance of one ideology ended and cold war also finished.
Q.25. What was the foreign policy of India towards America and USSR during the
Cold War? Do you agree that this policy had benefitted India?
Ans. India was a British Colony when Cold War had started but when India became
independent on 15 August, 1947 then it very judiciously and aptly framed the foreign
policies by which could benefit India. Although, it didn’t involve itself in blocs of America
and Soviet Union by adopting non-alignment policy but always tried to maintain good
relationships with America and Soviet Union.India – Soviet Union Relationship: The
relationships of India with Soviet Union have always been cordial. Nehru was always
inclined towards Soviet Union. The relations were not noticeable in the period of Stalin
and Nehru opted non-alignment policy after independence.
There was a gap in relations. When P.S. Menan went as an ambassador in Soviet
Union, then the relations started improving. India – Soviet relations deepened during
Khrushchev’s period (1954-64). But when India didn’t support Soviet Union’s
interference in Hungary in 1956, the relations were affected. Soviet – China conflict
strengthened India – Soviet relations because China had attacked India in 1962. Allies
treaty was signed between Soviet Union and India at the time of Bangladesh crises.
Soviet Union provided India its diplomatic and military support. After that, relations were
strengthened from 1971 to 1975. The relations were as it is during the period of Morarji
Desai’s tenure as Prime Minister in 1977.

Soviet Union provided military assistance and also provided technology. India got
MiG16, MiG-32, Helicopter and N-12 and A-N 32 cargo ships from Soviet Union and
help to Soviet Union when Soviet Union had to interfere Afghanistan with military force
in 1979, India gave its full assistance to Soviet Union. ‘India’s Festival’ was organised in
Soviet Union many times. Disintegration of Soviet Union occurred till 1990 and India –
Soviet relation turned into India – Russia relationship. In 2010, visit to India by Prime
Minister Putin and President Medvedev played an important role in strengthening
bilateral relationships between India and Russia. India–America Relationship: There
was a reluctance in Indian–American relations from the beginning. America was the
country which pressurised Britain to free India but after independence, India decided to
remain non-aligned and didn’t get involved in any of the blocs.
This wasn’t acceptable to America and this resulted in economical and military support
to our opposing & neighbouring country, Pakistan. Nehru’s visit to America improved
relations in 1957. When America supported Pakistan in Indo–Pak War, the threads of
relationships were loosened again. In 1977, the atomic treaty to supply Urenium for
Tarapur Nuclear Centre by America in the period of Janta Party was not followed. India
refused President Jimmy Carter to sign ‘Nuclear non-proliferation treaty’. America’s
continuous act of providing weapons to Pakistan against India prohibited cordial
relations during Indira Gandhi tenure as P.M. But India-America relations improved
when Rajiv Gandhi’s became the Prime Minister.
It continued to be cordial during the period of Bill Clinton’s tenure as President. When
World Trade Centre was attacked in 2001, America could realise India’s pain and both
the countries could establish ideological unification against terrorism and Indo-American
relationship improved. In November 2011, India’s visit by America’s President Obama
provided structural strength to India–America long term strategic relationship. Effect of
India’s foreign policies on its interests: As a leaders of NAM, India’s response to
ongoing Cold War was two-fold – at one level, it took particular case in staying away
from two alliances, second, it raised its voice against the newly decolonised countries
becoming part of these alliances. India tried to remove the conflicts between both
thealliances and tried to establish world peace. However, it also gave its contribution to
newly independent countries.
A non-aligned posture also served India’s interest very directly, in at least two
ways:
(i) Non-alignment allowed India to take international decisions and stances that served
its interests rather than the interests of superpowers and their allies.
(ii) India was often able to balance one superpower against the other. If India felt
ignored or unduly pressurised by one superpower, it could tilt towards the other. Neither
alliance system could take India for granted or bully it.

Q.26. How far is it correct to say the international alliances during the Cold War
era were determined by the requirements of the superpowers and the calculations
of the smaller status? Explain.
[CBSE Delhi 2016]
Ans. Superpowers used their military power to bring countries into their fold.
•
•
•

•
•
•

The statement is utmost correct about the super power as well as their alliances.
Soviet Union used its influence in Eastern Europe backed by the large armies of
countries of its alliance.
On the other hand, the United States built alliance called SEATO and CENTO on
the question of North Vietnam, North Korea and Iraq, Russia and China came
closer.
Alliances were made for the requirement of vital national resources.
Superpowers needed territories to launch their weapons and troops. In return,
they helped them in many ways.
Economic support was another factor.

