Very Short Answer

Q.1. What do you mean by South Asia?
Ans. The expression ‘South Asia’ usually includes the following countries: Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, The Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. The mighty Himalayas in
the North and the Vast Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal in the
South, West and East respectively provide a natural peculiarity to the region, which is
largely responsible for the linguistic, social and cultural distinctiveness of the subcontinent.
Q.2. Roots of democracy in India are deep. Explain with the help of examples.
Ans. Roots of democracy in India are deep. Due to this, step taken to establish a kind of
totalitarian at the time of national emergency from 25 June 1975 to 24 March 1977
could not succeed. Those who were responsible behind originating of emergency
situation in India were expelled from power and deep and unceasing allegiance was
showcased by India in democracy and democratic system.
Q.3. Which type of ruling system is there in Nepal?
Ans. Till 2006, parliamentary democracy was there under monarchial system in Nepal.
There were several restrictions on it. In 2006, there was such a massive, country wide
protest that the king was forced to restore the democracy. Monarchial system ended in
Nepal on 15 January 2007, when the constitution gained acceptance.
Q.4. Before 1971, explain any two reasons which led to a war between East
Pakistan (Present Bangladesh) and West Pakistan.
[CBSE Delhi 2013]
Ans. (i) After partition, eastern part of Bengal from Pakistan became a part of East
Pakistan. There was a distance of 1,200 miles between both regions of Pakistan.
Pakistan’s government didn’t pay attention to this region and Urdu language was
imposed on them.
(ii) Sheikh Mujibur Rahman could not become Prime Minister even after gaining
majority (160 seats out of 300 seats were won by him) in the elections.
Q.5. Which type of government was adopted in Bangladesh after its
independence? What were the results?
Ans. Bangladesh drafted its constitution declaring faith in secularism, democracy and
socialism. In 1975, presidential form of government was adopted. All the parties, except
Awami League were abolished. This led to mass public protests in Bangladesh and
situation of tension and struggle arose. In the middle of 1975, military of Bangladesh

protested against government of Sheikh Mujib. On 15 August, 1975, Sheikh Mujib,
along with his family was assassinated. The new military ruler Zia ur Rahman,
controlled the government.
Q.6. Mention any two positive steps or initiatives taken by Bangladesh and India
in the direction of mutual cooperation.
[CBSE (Comptt.) 2012]
Ans. (i) Efforts are done to broaden the areas of cooperation further by identifying
common threats and being more sensitive to each other’s needs.
(ii) To two states to cooperate regularly on disaster management and environmental
issues.
Q.7. Give a brief description of Indo-Nepal relations.
Ans. Indo-Nepal relations are fairly stable and peaceful. Both share a mutual culture
and 1,700 kilometers open boundary. After India’s independence, both countries signed
a treaty of peace and friendship in 1950. Both the countries have access to boundaries
and mutual safety. The citizens of the two countries to travel to and work in the other
country without visas and passports. Nepal’s citizens, except I.A.S., I.P.S. and I.F.S. are
active in assisting India’s government.
Q.8. How was ‘Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam’ formalised?
Ans. The neglect of Tamil, concerns by Sinhala community of Sri Lanka led to militant
Tamil nationalism. Tamils who had migrated from India were treated badly by Sri
Lankan government. As a result, ‘Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam’ (LTTE) was formed
and started demanding ‘Tamil Eelam’ or a separate country for the Tamils of Sri Lanka.
Q.9. Write any two reasons for unstable democracy in Pakistan.
[CBSE Delhi 2014]
Ans. There are several reasons for unstable democracy in Pakistan. The two main
reasons are as follows:
(i) Social dominance of the military, clergy, and landowning aristocracy.
(ii) Pakistan’s conflict with India has made the pro-military groups more powerful.
Q.10. What are the factors responsible for conflicts in political relations of IndoPakistan?
Ans. (i) To create situations of sudden war by continuous provoking on Kashmir issue
and intrusion by Pakistan.
(ii) To arise tensions by giving infuriating statements for muslims living in India.
(iii) To close the Indian Commerce embassy in Karachi.

(iv) Pakistan’s possession of nuclear weapons.
(v) Kargil War.
Q.11. What was decided and finalised under the treaty of Indo-Bangladesh in
1992?
Ans. (i) Not to interfere in each other’s internal affairs.
(ii) To respect each other’s boundaries.
(iii) Not to help any other country against each other.
(iv) To save each other at the time of attack.
(v) To cooperate with each other in technical, scientific and economic fields.
Q.12. Which projects are currently been running in Bhutan with the help of India?
Ans. Various projects are currently running in Bhutan with the help of India. ‘Chukha Jal
Bijli pariyojna’ was completed in October 1998. Paden cement plant was gifted to
Bhutan by India in 1980. Cement is produced in it since 1982. Medical projects, water
projects, grid transmission lines, bridges and roads in Thimpu and Mongar are included
in the projects running in Bhutan with India’s help.
Q.13. Write about major rules and principles of SAARC Charter.
Ans. Rules and principles are mentioned in SAARC Charter. Following are the main:
(i) To respect mutual beneficial principles and not to interfere in each other’s political
independence, internal affairs, regional integrity, equality and sovereignty.
(ii) To promote co-operation within SAARC and other countries.
(iii) Not to be against cooperation within SAARC and other countries.
Q.14. Write the full form of SAARC. List any three features of SAARC.
[CBSE (Comptt.) 2012]
Ans. SAARC stands for South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation. Following
are the three main features of SAARC.
1. To improve standard of living for the welfare of citizens of SAARC.
2. To accelerate economic, social and cultural development of South Asia.
3. To strongthen relations with other countries and to develop sense of mutual trust and
cooperation to resolve problems of citizens.
Q.15. What is SAARC?
[CBSE Sample Paper 2015]

Ans. SAARC is a name of association of eight countries of South Asia. SAARC stands
for ‘South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation’. It was established in 1985. It is
a major regional initiative by the South Asian states to evolve cooperation through
multilateral means. 18 summits of SAARC have been taken place so far. Its headoffice
is in Kathmandu, capital of Nepal.
Q.16. Why was 13th summit of SAARC important?
Ans. SAARC’s 13th summit was held on 12-13 November 2005 at Dhaka, capital of
Bangladesh. The decision of making Afghanistan as eighth member of SAARC was
taken by all the member countries in this summit. In addition to this, China and Japan
were allowed to take part in SAARC summits as supervisors. Supervisors are allowed to
take part in inauguration and completion ceremony of SAARC summits.

