Overview

Challenges to Democracy

This concluding chapter draws upon all that you have learnt in the
last two years so as to address the fundamental questions of
democratic politics : What are the challenges that democracy faces
in our country and elsewhere? What can be done to reform democratic
politics? How can our democracy become more democratic in its
practice and outcomes? This chapter does not answer these
questions. It only makes some suggestions about the way in which
we can approach the questions of challenges and reforms. It invites
you to think on your own and come up with your own reading of
the challenges, your recipe of how to overcome these and your own
definition of democracy.

Chapter 8

Challenges to
Democracy

101

2020-21

Thinking about challenges
Do you remember the chapters of your Political
Science textbook of Class IX? There we tracked the
expansion of democracy all over the world . Our
reading thereafter has confirmed our initial
impression: democracy is the dominant form of
government in the contemporary world. It does
not face a serious challenger or rival. Yet our exploration
of the various dimensions of democratic politics has
shown us something else as well. The promise of
democracy is far from realised anywhere in the world.
Democracy does not have a challenger, but that does
not mean that it does not face any challenges.
At different points in this tour of democracy,
we have noted the serious challenges that
democracy faces all over the world. A challenge is
not just any problem. We usually call only those
difficulties a ‘challenge’ which are significant and
which can be overcome. A challenge is a difficulty
that carries within it an opportunity for progress.
Once we overcome a challenge we go up to a higher
level than before.

Most of the established democracies face the
challenge of expansion. This involves applying the
basic principle of democratic government across all
the regions, different social groups and various
institutions. Ensuring greater power to local
governments, extension of federal principle to all the
units of the federation, inclusion of women and
minority groups, etc., falls under this challenge. This
also means that less and less decisions should remain
outside the arena of democratic control. Most
countries including India and other democracies like
the US face this challenge.
The third challenge of deepening of democracy
is faced by every democracy in one form or another.
This involves strengthening of the institutions and
practices of democracy. This should happen in such a
way that people can realise their expectations of
democracy. But ordinary people have different
expectations from democracy in different societies.
Therefore, this challenge takes different meanings and
paths in different parts of the world. In general
terms, it usually means strengthening those
institutions that help people’s participation
and control. This requires an attempt to
bring down the control and influence of
the rich and powerful people in making
governmental decision.
We have noted or hinted at these
challenges in all the various examples and
stories that we studied in our textbook
of Class IX and in the earlier chapters of
this book. Let us go back to all the major
stops in our tour of democracy, refresh
our memory and note down the
challenges that democracy faces in
each of these.

Democratic Politics

Different countries face different kinds of
challenges. At least one fourth of the globe is still
not under democratic government. The challenge
for democracy in these parts of the world is very
stark. These countries face the foundational
challenge of making the transition to democracy

and then instituting democratic government. This
involves bringing down the existing non-democratic
regime, keeping military away from controlling
government and establishing a sovereign and
functional state.

102

2020-21

Different contexts, different challenges
Each of these cartoons represents a challenge to democracy. Please describe what that challenge is. Also place it
in one of the three categories mentioned in the first section.
Seeing the democracy

Liberal Gender Equality

Campaign Money

Challenges to Democracy

© Tab - The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

© Ares - Best Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

© Ares - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

© Patrick Chappatte - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Mubarak Re-elected

103

2020-21

Case and context

Your description of the challenges for democracy in that
situation

Mexico: Second free
election after the defeat
of PRI in 2000; defeated
candidate alleges rigging
China: Communist Party
adopts economic reforms
but maintains monopoly
over political power
Pakistan: General
Musharraf held
referendum, allegations
of fraud in voters’ list
Iraq: Widespread
sectarian violence as the
new government fails to
establish its authority
South Africa: Mandela
retired from active politics,
pressure on his successors
to withdraw some
concessions given to
White minority
US, Guantanamo Bay:
UN Secretary General
called this a violation of
international law,
US refused to respond

Democratic Politics

Saudi Arabia: Women not
allowed to take part in
all public activities,
no freedom of religion for
minorities
Yugoslavia: Ethnic
tension between Serbs
and Albanians on the rise
in the province of Kosovo.
Yugoslavia disintergrated

104

2020-21

Case and context

Your description of the challenges for democracy in that
situation

Belgium: One round of
constitutional change
taken place, but the Dutch
speakers not satisfied;
they want more autonomy
Sri Lanka: The civil war
came to an end in 2009;
the process of
reconciliation between
different communities
begins
US, Civil Rights: Blacks
have won equal rights, but
are still poor, less
educated and marginalised
Northern Ireland: The
civil war has ended but
Catholics and Protestants
yet to develop trust
Nepal: The monarchy
was abolished; the
Constituent Assembly
adopted a new
constitution

Challenges to Democracy

Bolivia: Morales, a
supporter of water struggle,
becomes Prime Minister,
MNCs threaten to leave
the country

105

2020-21

Different types of challenges
Now that you have noted down all these challenges, let us group these together into some broad categories.
Given below are some spheres or sites of democratic politics. You may place against each of these the specific
challenges that you noted for one or more countries or cartoons in the previous section. In addition to that write
one item for India for each of these spheres. In case you find that some challenges do not fit into any of the
categories given below, you can create new categories and put some items under that.

Constitutional
design

Democratic
rights

Working of
institutions

Elections

Federalism,
decentralisation

Accommodation
of diversity

Democratic Politics

Political
organisations

Any other category

Any other category

106

2020-21

Let us group these again, this time by the nature of these challenges as per the classification suggested in the first
section. For each of these categories, find at least one example from India as well.
Foundational
challenge

Challenge of
expansion

Challenge of
deepening

Now let us think only about India. Think of all the challenges that democracy faces in contemporary India. List
those five that should be addressed first of all. The listing should be in order of priority, i.e, the challenge you
find most important or pressing should be mentioned at number 1, and so on. Give one example of that
challenge and your reasons for assigning it the priority.
Priority Challenges to
democracy

Example

Reasons for preference

1.

2.

Challenges to Democracy

3.

4.

5.

107

2020-21

Thinking about political reforms
Each of these challenges is linked to the possibility
of reforms. As mentioned above, we discuss
challenges only because we think these can be
overcome. Generally all the suggestions or proposals
about overcoming various challenges to democracy
are called ‘democracy reform’ or ‘political reform’.
We are not going to give here a list of desirable
political reforms, for there cannot be any such list. If
all the countries do not have the same challenges, it
follows that everyone cannot follow the same recipe
of political reforms. We cannot prescribe a procedure
for car repair without knowing which model the car
is, what the defect is and what tools are available,
where the car has broken down, etc.

Democratic Politics

Can we at least have a list of such reforms for our
country in today’s context? We can develop some
proposals for reforms at the national level. But the
real challenge of reforms may not lie at the national
level. Some of the crucial questions need to be thought
at the State or local level. Besides, such a list may
become irrelevant after some time. So, instead of that
let us think of some broad guidelines that can be kept
in mind while devising ways and means for political
reforms in India:
l It is very tempting to think of legal ways of
reforming politics, to think of new laws to ban
undesirable things. But this temptation needs to be
resisted. No doubt, law has an important role to play
in political reform. Carefully devised changes in law
can help to discourage wrong political practices and
encourage good ones. But legal-constitutional changes
by themselves cannot overcome challenges to
democracy. This is like the rules of cricket. A change
in rules for LBW decisions helped to reduce negative
batting tactics. But no one would ever think that the
quality of cricket could be improved mainly through
changes in the rules. This is to be done mainly by the
players, coaches and administrators. Similarly,
democratic reforms are to be carried out mainly by

political activists, parties, movements and politically
conscious citizens.
l Any legal change must carefully look at what results
it will have on politics. Sometimes the results may be
counter-productive. For example, many states have
banned people who have more than two children
from contesting panchayat elections. This has resulted
in denial of democratic opportunity to many poor
and women, which was not intended. Generally, laws
that seek to ban something are not very successful in
politics. Laws that give political actors incentives to do
good things have more chances of working. The best
laws are those which empower people to carry out
democratic reforms. The Right to Information Act is
a good example of a law that empowers the people
to find out what is happening in government and act
as watchdogs of democracy. Such a law helps to
control corruption and supplements the existing laws
that banned corruption and imposed strict penalties.
l Democratic reforms are to be brought about
principally through political practice. Therefore, the
main focus of political reforms should be on ways to
strengthen democratic practice. As we discussed in the
chapter on political parties, the most important concern
should be to increase and improve the quality of
political participation by ordinary citizens.
l Any proposal for political reforms should think not
only about what is a good solution but also about who
will implement it and how. It is not very wise to think
that the legislatures will pass legislations that go against
the interest of all the political parties and MPs. But
measures that rely on democratic movements, citizens’
organisations and the media are likely to succeed.
Let us keep these general guidelines in mind and
look at some specific instances of challenges to
democracy that require some measure of reform. Let
us try to come up with some concrete proposals of
reform.

108

2020-21

Here are some challenges that require political reforms. Discuss these challenges in detail. Study the reform
options offered here and give your preferred solution with reasons. Remember that none of the options
offered here is ‘right’ or ‘wrong’. You can opt for a mix of more than one options, or come up with something
that is not offered here. But you must give your solution in detail and offer reasons for your choice.
Doctors’ absenteeism
Challenge:

Political funding
Challenge:

Uttar Pradesh government got a survey done and
found out that most of the doctors posted in the rural
Primary Health Centres are simply not there. They live
in a town, carry out private practice and visit the village
where they are posted only once or twice in the entire
month. Villagers have to travel to towns and pay very
high fee to private doctors even for common ailments.

On an average, every candidate who contested the
last Lok Sabha elections owned a property of more
than Rs one crore. There is a fear that only wealthy
people or those with their support can afford to
fight elections. Most of the political parties are
dependent on money given by big business houses.
The worry is that the role of money in politics will
reduce whatever little voice the poor have in our
democracy.

Reform proposals:
l The government should make it compulsory
for the doctors to live in the village where they are
posted, otherwise their service should be terminated.
l District administration and police should carry
out surprise raids to check the attendance of the
doctors.
l Village panchayat should be given the power to
write the annual report of the doctor which should
be read out in the Gram Sabha meeting.
l Problems like this can be solved only if Uttar
Pradesh is split into several smaller states which can
be administered more efficiently.

Reform proposals:
l The financial accounts of every political party
should be made public. These accounts should be
examined by government auditors.
l There should be state funding of elections.
Parties should be given some money by the
government to meet their election expenditure.
l Citizens should be encouraged to give more
donations to parties and to political workers.
Such donations should be exempt from income
tax.

Any other problem of your choice

Challenges to Democracy

Challenge:

Reform proposals:
l
l
l

109

2020-21

Reforming
politics

Rose managed to catch Madam Lyngdoh outside the
classroom,
something she had been
planning to do for some time. “Ma’am! I
really liked that Canadian cartoon”. Rose
needed something to open the
conversation. “Which one?” Madam
Lyngdoh could not recall. “Ma’am, the one
which says 98% Canadians want all the
politicians to be locked in the trunk of a
car and thrown into Niagara falls. I was
thinking of our politicians. We would need a
bigger vehicle and a river as mighty as
Brahmaputra!”
Lyngdoh Ma’am smiled at Rose. Like most
Indians, she is also very much unhappy
with the way politicians of the country have been behaving and running the parties and
governments. But she wanted Rose to appreciate the complexity of the problem: “Do you
think our problems will be solved if we get rid of our politicians?,” she asked.

“Yes, Ma’am. Aren’t these mean politicians responsible for all the problems in our country?
I mean corruption, defection, casteism, communal violence, criminality… everything.”
Lyngdoh Madam: “So, all we need is to get rid of the current lot. Are you sure that those
who replace them will not do these things?”
Rose: “Well, I had not thought of it, but may be not. May be we will get leaders of better
character”.
Lyngdoh Madam: “I agree with you that the situation will change if people show more care
and alertness to reject corrupt and bad politicians and elect the right ones. And, maybe,
all politicians are not corrupt…”
“How can you say that Ma’am” interrupted Rose.

Democratic Politics

Lyngdoh Madam: “I did not say that politicians are not corrupt. Maybe when you think of
politicians, you think of these big people whose photos appear in newspapers. I think of
political leaders that I have known. I don’t think that the political leaders I know are more
corrupt than my own colleagues, government officials, contractors or other middle class
professionals that I know. The corruption of the politician is more visible and we get the
impression that all politicians are corrupt. Some of them are and some of them are not.”
Rose did not give up. “Ma’am, what I meant is that there should be strict laws to curb
corruption and wrong practices like appeals to caste and community.”
Lyngdoh Madam: “I am not sure, Rose. For one thing there is already a law banning any
appeal to caste and religion in politics. Politicians find a way to bypass that. Laws can
have little impact unless people resist attempts to mislead and divide people in the name
of caste and religion. You cannot have democracy in a real sense unless people and
politicians overcome the barriers of caste and religion.”

110

2020-21

Redefining democracy
We began this tour of democracy last year with a
minimal definition of democracy. Do you remember
that? This is what Chapter 2 of your textbook said last
year: democracy is a form of government in which
the rulers are elected by the people. We then looked at
many cases and expanded the definition slightly to add
some qualifications:
l the rulers elected by the people must take all the
major decisions;
l elections must offer a choice and fair opportunity
to the people to change the current rulers;
l this choice and opportunity should be available to
all the people on an equal basis; and
l the exercise of this choice must lead to a
government limited by basic rules of the constitution
and citizens’ rights.
You may have felt disappointed that the definition
did not refer to any high ideals that we associate with
democracy. But in operational terms, we deliberately
started with a minimalist but clear definition of
democracy. It allowed us to make a clear distinction
between democratic and non-democratic regimes.

l Our discussion of democracy has gone beyond
the government and its activities. We discussed how
eliminating discrimination based on caste, religion and
gender is important in a democracy.
l Finally, we have had some discussion about some
outcomes that one can expect from a democracy.
In doing so, we have not gone against the definition
of democracy offered last year. We began then with a
definition of what is the minimum a country must
have to be called a democracy. In the course of our
discussion we moved to the set of desirable conditions
that a democracy should have. We have moved from
the definition of democracy to the description of a
good democracy.
How do we define a good democracy? What are
its features? Which are the features a democracy must
have to be called a good democracy? And what must
not take place in a democracy if it is a good democracy?
You decide that.
Reading between the Lines

l We have taken up power sharing as the spirit of
democracy and discussed how power sharing between
governments and social groups is necessary in
a democracy.
l We saw how democracy cannot be the brute rule
of majority and how a respect for minority voice is
necessary for democracy.

Challenges to Democracy

l We discussed democratic rights at length and noted
that these rights are not limited to the right to vote,
stand in elections and form political organisations. We
discussed some social and economic rights that a
democracy should offer to its citizens.

© Ares - Best Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

You may have noticed that in the course of our
discussions of various aspects of democratic
government and politics, we have gone beyond that
definition:

111

2020-21

Here is your space for writing your own definition of good democracy.

(Write your name here) ________________________ ’s definition of good
democracy (not more than 50 words):

Features (use only as many points as you want. Try to compress it in as few points as
possible)
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Democratic Politics

7.

How did you like this exercise? Was it enjoyable? Very demanding? A little frustrating? And a little scary? Are
you a little resentful that the textbook did not help you in this crucial task? Are you worried that your definition
may not be ‘correct’?
Here then is your last lesson in thinking about democracy: there is no fixed definition of good democracy.
A good democracy is what we think it is and what we wish to make it. This may sound strange. Yet, think of it:
is it democratic for someone to dictate to us what a good democracy is?

112

2020-21

