Democracy
and
Diversity

Democracy and Diversity

In the last chapter, we saw how power can be distributed to
accommodate linguistic and regional diversities. But language and
region are not the only features that give a distinct identity to
people. Sometimes, people also identify themselves and relate with
others on the basis of their physical appearance, class, religion,
gender, caste, tribe, etc. In this chapter, we study how democracy
responds to social differences, divisions and inequalities. We begin
with an example of public expression of social divisions. We then
draw some general lessons about how social differences can take
various forms. We then turn to how democratic politics affects and
is affected by these social diversities.

Chapter 3

Overview

29
2020-21

A Story from Mexico Olympics

Civil Rights Movement
in the USA (1954-1968)
refers to a set of events
and reform movements
aimed at abolishing legal
racial discrimination
against African-Americans.
Led by Martin Luther
King Jr., this movement
practiced non-violent
methods of civil
disobedience against
racially discriminatory
laws and practices.
African-American,
Afro-American, Black
American, or Black are the
terms used to refer mainly
to the descendants of
Africans who were
brought into America as
slaves between the 17th
century and early 19th
century.
The Black Power
movement emerged in
1966 and lasted till 1975,
which was a more militant
anti-racist movement,
advocating even violence
if necessary to end racism
in the US.

tried to draw international attention to
racial discrimination in the United
States. The black-gloved and raised
clenched fists were meant to symbolise
BLACK POWER. The silver medallist,
white Australian athlete, Peter Norman,
wore a human rights badge on his shirt
during the ceremony to show his
support to the two Americans.
Do you think that Carlos and
Smith should have raised an internal
matter of American society in an
international forum? Would you say
that what they did was political? Why
do you think Peter Norman, who was
neither Black nor American, joined in
the gesture of protest? If you were in
Norman’s place what would you do?

© wikipedia & photo flickr.com Kevin

D e m o c ra t i c Po l i t i c s

My salute to
Carlos and
Smith! Will I ever
have the courage
to do what they
did?

The pictures on this
page
depict
an
important landmark in
the history of the CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT IN
THE U NITED S TATES .
These represent the medal ceremony
of the 200 metres race in the 1968
Olympics held at Mexico City. The two
men standing with clenched fists
upraised and heads bowed, while the
American national anthem was
played, are the US athletes, Tommie
Smith and John Carlos. They are
AFRICAN-AMERICANS. They had won the
gold and bronze medals respectively.
They received their medals wearing
black socks and no shoes to represent
Black poverty. With this gesture, they

In 2005, the San Jose State University installed a 20-foot high sculpture representing the
protest by Tommie Smith and John Carlos. A photograph of the original medal ceremony
in 1968 is on the top.

30
2020-21

succeeded in gaining international
attention for the Civil Rights Movement
in the US. Recently, the San Jose
(pronounced ‘Saan Hoze’) State
University, of which they were former
students, honoured them and installed
their statue in the University campus.
When Norman died in 2006, Smith and
Carlos were pallbearers at his funeral.

Some Dalit groups decided to participate in the UN Conference
Against Racism in Durban in 2001, demanding the inclusion of caste
in the agenda of this conference. Here are three reactions to this move:
Amandeep Kaur (a government official): Our Constitution declares
caste discrimination to be illegal. If some caste discrimination
continues, it is an internal matter. I am opposed to this being raised in
an international forum.
Oinam (a sociologist): I am opposed to this because caste and race are
not similar divisions. Caste is a social division, while race is a biological
one. Raising caste in this conference on racism would mean equating
the two.
Ashok (a Dalit activist): The argument about internal matter is a
way of preventing open discussion of oppression and
I met this group
discrimination. Race is not purely biological. It is as much a legal
of girls from
and sociological category as caste. Caste discrimination must be
Pakistan and felt
raised in this conference.
that I had more
in common with
Which of the three opinions do you agree with most and why?
them than many
girls from other
parts of my own
country. Is this
anti-national to
feel so?

Differences, similarities, divisions
The athletes in the example above were
responding to social divisions and
social inequalities. But does that
happen only in societies which have
racial divisions? In the previous two
chapters we have already noted some
other forms of social divisions. The
examples of Belgium and Sri Lanka

show both regional and social divisions.
In the case of Belgium we noted that
people who live in different regions
speak different languages. In Sri Lanka,
we noted linguistic as well as religious
differences. Thus social diversity can
take different for ms in different
societies.

Democracy and Diversity

The International Olympic
Association held Carlos and Smith guilty
of violating the Olympic spirit by
making a political statement. Their
medals were taken back. Back home,
they were subjected to a lot of criticism.
Norman too suffered for his action and
was not included in the Australian team
for the next Olympic. But their action

31
2020-21

Origins of social differences

Every social difference does not
lead to social division. Social
differences divide similar people from
one another, but they also unite very
different people. People belonging to
different social g roups share
differences and similarities cutting
across the boundaries of their groups.
In the instance above, Carlos and
Smith were similar in one way (both
were African-American) and thus
different from Nor man who was
white. But they were also all similar in
other ways – they were all athletes who
stood against racial discrimination.
It is fairly common for people
belonging to the same religion to feel
that they do not belong to the same
community, because their caste or sect
is very different. It is also possible for
people from different religions to have
the same caste and feel close to each
other. Rich and poor persons from the
same family often do not keep close
relations with each other for they feel
they are very different. Thus, we all
have more than one identity and can
belong to more than one social group.
We have different identities in different
contexts.

© Ares - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

D e m o c ra t i c Po l i t i c s

These social differences are mostly
based on accident of birth. Normally
we don’t choose to belong to our
community. We belong to it simply
because we were born into it. We all
experience social differences based on
accident of birth in our everyday lives.
People around us are male or female,
they are tall and short, have different
kinds of complexions, or have different
physical abilities or disabilities. But all
kinds of social differences are not
based on accident of birth. Some of
the differences are based on our
choices. For example, some people are
atheists. They don’t believe in God or
any religion. Some people choose to

follow a religion other than the one in
which they were born. Most of us
choose what to study, which
occupation to take up and which
games or cultural activities to take part
in. All these lead to formation of social
groups that are based on our choices.

A cartoon like this can be read by different
people to mean different things. What does
this cartoon mean to you? How do other
students in your class read this?

32
2020-21

Overlapping and cross-cutting
differences
Social division takes place when some
social difference overlaps with other
differences. The difference between
the Blacks and Whites becomes a social
division in the US because the Blacks
tend to be poor, homeless and
discriminated against. In our country
Dalits tend to be poor and landless.
They often face discrimination and
injustice. Situations of this kind
produce social divisions, when one
kind of social difference becomes
more important than the other and
people start feeling that they belong to
different communities.

Read these two poems by Dalit writers. Why do you think the
poster is titled ‘Hidden Apartheid’ ?

Social divisions of one kind or
another exist in most countries. It does
not matter whether the country is small
or big. India is a vast country with many
communities. Belgium is a small country
with many communities. Even those
countries such as Germany and Sweden,
that were once highly HOMOGENEOUS, are
undergoing rapid change with influx of
people from other parts of the world.
MIGRANTS bring with them their own
culture and tend to form a different
social community. In this sense most
countries of the world are multi-cultural.

Homogeneous society:
A society that has similar
kinds of people,
especially where there
are no significant ethnic
differences.
Migrant: Anybody who
shifts from one region
or country to another
region within a country
or to another country,
usually for work or other
economic opportunities.

Democracy and Diversity

If social differences cross cut one
another, it is difficult to pit one group
of people against the other. It means
that groups that share a common
interest on one issue are likely to be in
different sides on a different issue.
Consider the cases of Northern
Ireland and the Netherlands. Both are
predominantly Christian but divided
between Catholics and Protestants. In
Northern Ireland, class and religion
overlap with each other. If you are
Catholic, you are also more likely to be
poor, and you may have suffered a
history of discrimination. In the
Netherlands, class and religion tend to
cut across each other. Catholics and
Protestants are about equally likely to
be poor or rich. The result is that
Catholics and Protestants have had
conflicts in Northern Ireland, while
they do not do so in the Netherlands.
Overlapping social differences create
possibilities of deep social divisions
and tensions. Cross-cutting social
differences are easier to accommodate.

33
2020-21

Imrana is a student of Class X, section B. She and all her classmates are
planning to help students of Class XI in giving a farewell party to the
students of Class XII. Last month she played for section team in a game of
kho-kho against the team of Class X, section A. She goes back home in a bus
and joins all the students from various classes. They all come from transYamuna area in Delhi. Back home, she often joins her elder sister, Naima, in
complaining against her brother who does no work at home, while the sisters
are asked to help their mother. Her father is looking for a good match for her
elder sister, from a Muslim family with a similar economic status from their
own ‘biradari’.
Can you list the various kinds of identities Imrana has?
At home
she is
a girl
In terms of religion
she is
………….
In the school
she is
………….
……………
she is
…………
…………….
she is
………….

D e m o c ra t i c Po l i t i c s

Politics of social divisions
How do these social divisions affect
politics? What does politics do to these
social divisions? At first sight, it would
appear that the combination of politics
and social divisions is very dangerous
and explosive. Democracy involves
competition among various political
parties. Their competition tends to
divide any society. If they start
competing in terms of some existing
social divisions, it can make social
divisions into political divisions and
lead to conflict, violence or even
disintegration of a country. This has
happened in many countries.
Range of outcomes
Take the case of Northern Ireland that
we referred to above. This region of
the United Kingdom has been for many

34
2020-21

years the site of a violent and bitter
ethno-political conflict. Its population
is divided into two major sects of
Christianity: 53 per cent are
Protestants, while 44 per cent are
Roman Catholics. The Catholics were
represented by Nationalist parties who
demanded that Northern Ireland be
unified with the Republic of Ireland,
a predominantly Catholic country. The
Protestants were represented by
Unionists who wanted to remain with
the UK, which is predominantly
protestant. Hundreds of civilians,
militants and security forces were killed
in the fight between Unionists and
Nationalists and between the security
forces of the UK and the Nationalists.
It was only in 1998, that the UK
government and the Nationalists

Bulgaria,
Romania
or

Ganesh had come back from his trip and was talking to Mahashweta
about the Roma people who live in many countries of Eastern
Europe. He met Yordanka who works as a nurse in Bulgaria. This is
what she has to say about Roma people:

“Being a nurse you can’t refuse to look after some people, but
these Roma people are very dirty. Even when something small
happens to any one in their family, all the family and even the
neighbours just march to our hospital. And once they are in the hospital
they don’t know how to keep quiet. They talk aloud, smoke and drop ashes all
over and spit on the wall! They have no patience, and they just start pestering our
doctors! And when they are just hanging out like that any way they look so
aggressive. After all these dark skinned people don’t look like us. They have a
strange sense of colour. Look at their dress, why can’t they try to look like
everyone else in the country? And we all know they are thieves. I have heard
people say that these Roma people live by selling their blood. None of them can
afford the hospital fees. But when they are ill they just rush to hospital at the cost
of good Bulgarians who pay their taxes!”

India?

“That sounds familiar’ said Mahashweta.

Mahashweta heard him out and said, “Ganesh, why do you have to travel
halfway across the world to find this out? This is not a story about Romania
and Bulgaria or about the Roma people. This is as much a story about our
own country and about our people who are branded as criminals by our
system.”
l Do you think Mahashweta is right? Do you know of some community
in your area that is treated like the Romas?
l
Have you heard people say things similar to what Yordanka or
Modruzeni say here? If yes, try to think of what the story would sound like if
you heard it from the other side?
Do you think the Bulgarian government should try to ensure that the
Roma people dress and behave like other people from Bulgaria?

Democracy and Diversity

Ganesh went on to talk about Modruzeni, a Romani who lives in Romania. When
she was eighteen years old, she went to the hospital, to give birth to her first
child. She had no money to pay to the doctor or nurse. Though she was in the
hospital, nobody bothered to come and take care of her. Finally the sweeper, who
was also a Romani, helped her give birth to a boy. And then the nurse appeared on
the scene and said, “Here we have another criminal”. Talking about how the Roma
people are treated in public hospitals, she says: “These doctors keep us waiting
outside their cabins. On one occasion one doctor asked me to take a bath if I
needed to be examined! Of course, I smelled. During the pregnancy I ate
from the garbage containers, because I was so hungry all the time. My
husband had left me. I had two children, and I was pregnant with the
third.
The social worker refused my request for food assistance. My neighbour
helped me to deliver the baby. I often feel it is better not to visit these
hospitals.”

35
2020-21

reached a peace treaty after which the
latter suspended their armed struggle.
In Yugoslavia, the story did not have a
happy ending. Political competition
along religious ending ethnic lines led
to the disintegration of Yugoslavia
into six independent countries.
So, it happens all
over the world,
even in Europe!
I thought it was
only in countries
like India that we
have social
divisions.

Such examples lead some people
to conclude that politics and social
divisions must not be allowed to mix.
They think that it would be best if there
are no social divisions in any country.
If social divisions do exist in a country,
they must never be expressed in politics.

© Orion / Juska Rantanen flickr.com

D e m o c ra t i c Po l i t i c s

At the same time every expression
of social divisions in politics does not
lead to such disasters. We have already
seen that social divisions of one kind
or another exist in most countries of
the world. Wherever they exist, these
divisions are reflected in politics. In a
democracy it is only natural that
political parties would talk about these

In some societies of Northern Ireland, the colonies of Protestant and
Catholic communities are divided by walls. These walls are sometimes
filled with graffiti as you can see here. The Irish Republican Army and
British Government signed an agreement in 2005. What does the graffiti
here tell about the conflict in the society?

36
2020-21

divisions, make different promises to
different communities, look after due
representation of various communities
and make policies to redress the
grievances of the disadvantaged
communities. Social divisions affect
voting in most countries. People from
one community tend to prefer some
party more than others. In many
countries there are parties that focus
only on one community. Yet all this
does not lead to disintegration of the
country.
Three determinants
Three factors are crucial in deciding
the outcome of politics of social
divisions. First of all, the outcome
depends on how people perceive their
identities. If people see their identities
in singular and exclusive terms, it
becomes very difficult to
accommodate. As long as people in
Northern Ireland saw themselves as
only Catholic or Protestant, their
differences were difficult to reconcile.
It is much easier if the people see that
their identities are multiple and are
complementary with the national
identity. A majority of Belgians now
feel that they are as much Belgian as
they are Dutch or German-speaking.
This helps them to stay together. This
is how most people in our country see
their identity: they think of themselves
as Indian as well as belonging to a state
or a language group or a social or
religious community.
Second, it depends on how
political leaders raise the demands of
any community. It is easier to
accommodate demands that are within
the constitutional framework and are
not at the cost of another community.

But a positive attitude towards
diversity and a willingness to
accommodate it do not come about
easily. People who feel marginalised,
deprived and discriminated have to
fight against the injustices. Such a fight
often takes the democratic path,
voicing their demands in a peaceful and
constitutional manner and seeking a
fair position through elections.
Sometimes social differences can take
the form of unacceptable level of
social inequality and injustice. The
struggle against such inequalities
sometimes takes the path of violence
and defiance of state power. However
history shows that democracy is the
best way to fight for recognition and
also to accommodate diversity.

1. Discuss three factors that determine the outcomes of politics of
social divisions.
2. When does a social difference become a social division?
3. How do social divisions affect politics? Give two examples.
4. ________________ social differences create possibilities of deep
social divisions and tensions. ___________________ social
differences do not usually lead to conflicts.

So, you are
saying that too
many small
divisions are
better than a
single big
division? Are you
also saying that
politics is a force
of unity?

Democracy and Diversity

Thus the assertion of social
diversities in a country need not be seen
as a source of danger. In a democracy,
political expression of social divisions
is very normal and can be healthy. This
allows various disadvantaged and
marginal social groups to express their
grievances and get the government to
attend to these. Expression of various
kinds of social divisions in politics
often results in their cancelling one
another out and thus reducing their

intensity. This leads to strengthening
of a democracy.

Exercises

Third, it depends on how the
government reacts to demands of
different groups. As we saw in the
examples of Belgium and Sri Lanka,
if the rulers are willing to share power
and accommodate the reasonable
demands of minority community,
social divisions become less
threatening for the country. But if they
try to suppress such a demand in the
name of national unity, the end result
is often quite the opposite. Such
attempts at forced integration often
sow the seeds of disintegration.

Draw or collect some
images of social divisions
in different aspects of life.
Can you think of some
examples of social
division or discrimination
in the field of sports?

© Dario Castillejos - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

The demand for ‘only Sinhala’ was at
the cost of the interest and identity of
the Tamil community in Sri Lanka. In
Yugoslavia, the leaders of different
ethnic communities presented their
demands in such a way that these could
not be accommodated within a single
country.

37
2020-21

5. In dealing with social divisions which one of the following statements
is NOT correct about democracy?
(a) Due to political competition in a democracy, social divisions get
reflected in politics.
(b) In a democracy it is possible for communities to voice their
grievances in a peaceful manner.
(c) Democracy is the best way to accommodate social diversity.
(d) Democracy always leads to disintegration of society on the basis
of social divisions.

Exercises

D e m o c ra t i c Po l i t i c s

6. Consider the following three statements.
A. Social divisions take place when social differences overlap.
B. It is possible that a person can have multiple identities.
C. Social divisions exist in only big countries like India.
Which of the statements is/are correct?
(a) A, B and C
(b) A and B
(c) B and C

(d) Only C

7. Arrange the following statements in a logical sequence and select
the right answers by using the code given below.
A. But all political expression of social divisions need not be always
dangerous.
B. Social divisions of one kind or the other exist in most countries.
C. Parties try to win political support by appealing to social
divisions.
D. Some social differences may result in social divisions.
(a) D, B, C, A

(b) D, B, A, C

(c) D, A, C, B

(d) A, B, C, D

8. Among the following, which country suffered disintegration due to
political fights on the basis of religious and ethnic identities?
(a) Belgium

(b) India

(c) Yugoslavia

(d) Netherlands

9. Read the following passage from a famous speech by Martin Luther
King Jr. in 1963. Which social division is he talking about? What are
his aspirations and anxieties? Do you see a relationship between this
speech and the incident in Mexico Olympics mentioned in this
chapter?
“I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a
nation where they will not be judged by the colour of their skin
but by the content of their character. Let freedom ring. And when
this happens, and when we allow freedom ring—when we let it
ring from every village and every hamlet, from every state and
every city, we will be able to speed up that day when all of God’s
children—black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles,
Protestants and Catholics—will be able to join hands and sing in
the words of the old Negro spiritual: ‘Free at last! Free at last!
Thank God Almighty, we are free at last!’ I have a dream that
one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of
its creed: ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men
are created equal’.”

38
2020-21

