SOLVED
PAPER

(with CBSE
Marking Scheme)

Summative Assessment-I
(2015 – 16)
Class–X

Time : 3 Hours

Social
Science
Code–6AP67LB
Max. Marks : 90

General Instructions :
(i)

The question paper has 30 questions in all. All questions are compulsory.

(ii)

Marks are indicated against each question.

(iii)

Questions from serial number 1 to 8 are very short answer type questions. Each question carries one mark.

(iv)

Questions from serial number 9 to 21 are 3 marks questions. Answer of these questions should not exceed 80 words each.

(v)

Questions from serial number 22 to 29 are 5 marks questions. Answer of these questions should not exceed 120 words each.

(vi)

Question number 30 is map question of 3 marks from Geography. After completion, attach the map inside your answer
book.

1. Mention any one feature of the oldest Japanese book.
1
OR
		
Which novel written in Bengali in 1956 describe the community life of the fisher-folks in detail?
2. Which regions of India have well developed terrace farming?
1
3. What status has been given to Hindi by the Constitution of India?
1
4. Which language is spoken by majority of Sri Lankans?
1
5. Give one example to show overlapping social differences create possibilities of deep social divisions and
tensions.		
1
6. Mention any one development goals of landless rural labourers.
1
7. Where is the disguised unemployment found mostly?
1
8. What is the full form of HDI?		
1
9. Mention three reasons for the creation of International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
3
OR
		
'With the industrial revolute the machine-made goods became cheaper and weavers could not compete with
them.' Justify the statement with relevant reasons.
OR
		
Why did the population of London expand from the middle of the eighteenth century? Give any three reasons.
		
		
10. 'Trade flourished and markets expanded in the late 19th century, but there was a darker side to this process'. Justify
the statement.		
3
OR
		
How did farming methods change due to industrialization? Explain.
OR
		
What led to the expansion of population in Bombay in the mid 19th century? Give any three reasons.
11. Why did Catholic Church bring out the index of prohibited books?
3
OR
		
In what ways were the novels in colonial India useful for both the colonizers as well as the nationalists ?
12. Why were women not educated in India in the early part of nineteenth century? Give any two reasons.
3
OR
		
Highlight the Social changes in Britain which led to an increase in women readers.
13. What is Joint Forest Management Programme? Which was the first state to adopt this programme?
3
14. Mention any four main objectives of Multipurpose River Valley Projects. Name any two Multipurpose Projects of
India.		
3
15. Describe any three technological and institutional reforms made in the field of agriculture in India.
3

2 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

16. Suppose a politician seeks your vote on the religious ground. Why is his act considered against the norms of
democracy? Explain.		
3
17. Highlight any three steps taken by India towards making it a federation.
3
18. Why is power-sharing desirable? Explain any two reasons.
3
19. What is sustainable development? Why is the issue of sustainability important for development? Explain.
3
20. How are the three sectors of the economy different from each other? Explain.
3
21. Why do people prefer to work in an organized sector? Explain.
3
22. Describe the factors that led to the Great Depression of 1929.
5
OR
		
Explain the statement "Certain groups of weavers were in a better position than others to survive the competition
with mill industries".		
OR
		
Why did London city dwellers become rebellious during 19th century?
23. How did print create the possibility of wide circulation of ideas and discussion? Explain.
5
OR
		
How did novels in India attempt to create a sense of Pan-Indian belonging? Explain.
24. Explain any three geographical conditions required for the growth of rice in India. How is it possible to grow rice
in areas of less rainfall ? Explain with examples.		
5
25. Describe any five distinct characteristics of 'Arid soils'.
5
26. "Elections are all about caste and nothing else." Explain the statement.
5
27. "Politics and social divisions must not be allowed to mix." Substantiate this statement, with five arguments.
5
28. What is Development? Why do different people have different developmental goals? Explain with four
examples.		
5
29. Compare the employment conditions prevailing in the organized and the unorganized sectors.
5
30. (a) One feature A is shown in the given political outline map of India. Identify this feature with the help of
following information and write its correct name on the line marked on the map :
3
			
(A) A soil type
		 (b) On the same political outline map of India, locate and label the following features with appropriate symbols:
			
(B) A State which is the major producer of sugarcane
			
(C) Manas Tiger Reserve

A

km 100 0 100

300

500 km

SRI
LANKA
I N D I A N

O C E A N



[ 3

SOLVED PAPER - 2015

CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015
1. Oldest Japanese book contained six sheets of text and woodcut illustrations.
1
OR
		
Titash Ekti Nadir Naam.		
2. Western and Central Himalayas		
1
3. Official language of the country		
1
4. Sinhala		
1
5. Catholics and Protestants have had conflicts in Northern Ireland
1
6. Development goals of landless rural labourers are :		
1
		
(i) Regular income
		
(ii) Regular job
		
(iii) Small piece of land
		
(iv) Equal status in society.
(Any one)
		 (Any other relevant point)
7. Agricultural sector/casual workers in the service sector
1
8. Human Development Index		
1
9. Three reasons for the creation of International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are :
		
(i) They were created to meet the financial needs of the industrial countries.
		
(ii) When Japan and Europe rapidly rebuilt economies, they became less dependent on the IMF and the World
Bank.
		
(iii) Thus, from the late 1950s the Bretton Woods Institutions, WB and IMF, began to turn their attention towards
newly developing countries.
		
(iv) The newly independent countries facing problems of poverty came under the guidance of international
agencies dominated by the former colonial powers.
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
OR
		
Reasons are :		
		
(i) Britain imposed import duties on cotton textiles, thus export market declined.
		
(ii) Export of British goods to India increased because of this, Manchester goods flooded in Indian markets.
		
(iii) Raw cotton exports from India to Britain shot up the prices of cotton.
		
(iv) By 1850, reports from most weaving regions were about decline and desolation.
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
OR
		
The population of London expanded from the middle of the eighteenth century because :
		
(i) London became a poweful magnet for unemployed migrant population from the rural areas.
		
(ii) London's five major industries provided opportunities to small masters, skilled, semi-skilled workers, casual
labourers and servants.
		
(iii) There was a dockyard which provided opportunities of livelihood.
1×3=3
10. (i) In many parts of the world, these developments meant loss of freedoms and livelihoods.
		
(ii) In late 19th century, Europeans conquest brought about many destructive economic, social and ecological
changes in the colonies.
		
(iii) In Africa, in the 1890s, a fast spreading disease of cattle plague or rinderpest had a terrifying impact on
people's livelihoods and the local economy.
		
(iv) The example of indentured labour migration from India illustrates that it was a world of faster economic
growth for some and great misery and poverty for others.
		
(v) technological advances in Europe and new forms of coercion in Asia and Africa (Any three to be justified)
1×3=3
OR
		 Due to industrialisation, changed farming methods are :
		
(i) Steel plough used in place of wooden plough.
		
(ii) Harrow in place of wooden Weeder.
		
(iii) Mechanical drill for seed sowing, reaping and threshing machines.
1×3=3
OR
		
(i) It was at the junction head of two major railways.
		
(ii) Famine in the dry regions of Kutch drove large numbers of people into Bombay.
		
(iii) People came here looking for job opportunities.
1×3=3

4 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

11. (i) Large number of printed books which carried ideas against the beliefs and practices of the Church came in to
the market.
		
(ii) The Roman Church, troubled by such effects of popular reading and questionings of faith, imposed severe
controls over publishers and booksellers and began to maintain an Index of Prohibited books from 1558.
		
(iii) The faithful and believers were prohibited to read these books.
1×3=3
OR
		
(i) Colonial administrators found vernacular novels a valuable source of information about native life and
customs.
		
(ii) New novels had descriptions about domestic life, people's dress, their religious worship, their beliefs and
practices.
		
(iii) Indians used novels as a medium to criticise the defects in their society and suggest remedies.
		
(v) Through glorified account of the past, these novels helped in creating a sense of national pride among their
readers.
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
12. Reasons :
		
(i) This was because of the superstitions and myths that prevailed in the society.
		
(ii) Conservative Hindus believed that a literate girl would be widowed and Muslims feared that educated
women would be corrupted by reading Urdu romances.
1½ + 1½ = 3
OR
		
(i) As the middle classes became more affluent, women got more leisure time to read and write novels.
		
(ii) Novels began to explore the world of women, their emotions, identities, experiences and problems.
		
(iii) Domestic life became an essential subject of novels–a field women had an authority to speak about. 1 × 3 = 3
13. (i) A programme which involves local communities in the management and restoration of degraded forests. It
involves local communities and land managed by forest department.
1½ + 1½ = 3
		
(ii) This programme was first passed in 1988 by the state of Odisha
14. Objectives of Multipurpose Projects are :
		
(i) Control floods and supply water during drought
		
(ii) Provide irrigation facilities
		
(iii) Generate electricity
		
(iv) Supply water for domestic and industrial uses
		
(v) Recreation
		
(vi) Inland navigation
		
(vii) Fish breeding
(Any four objectives) ½ × 4 = 2
		
Examples are :
		
(i) Sutlej-Beas River Basin
		
(ii) Bhakra-Nangal Project
		
(iii) Hirakud Project in the Mahanadi Basin
		
(Any two) ½ × 2 = 1
15. Any three of the below can be explained.
		
(i) Consolidation of holdings
		
(ii) Abolition of Zamindari
		
(iii) Green revolution
		
(iv) White revolution
		
(v) Personal Accident Insurance (Any other relevant reform)
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2015)
		
Detailed Answer :
		
(i) Land Reforms : Collectivization, consolidation of holdings, cooperation and abolition of zamindari.
		
(ii) Agricultural Reforms : Green revolution and White revolution.
		
(iii) Land Development Programmes : Provision for crop insurance against drought, flood, cyclone etc.,
establishment of Grameen banks, Cooperative societies and banks for providing loans.
		
(iv) Issuing of Kissan Credit Card and Personal Accident Insurance Scheme, etc.
		
(v) Special weather bulletins and agricultural programmes for farmers on radio and T.V. (Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
16. His act is against the spirit of democracy as he said politician is not working as per the Constitution.
		
(i) It also exploits the social difference.
		
(ii) It may create social discard and may lead to social division.
		
(iii) It is also biased attitude and neglects the principle of equality.
(Any other) 1 × 3 = 3
17. (i) Reorganization of states on linguistic basis.
		
(ii) Centre state relations.
		 (iii) Decentralization
			 (or any other relevant point)
1×3=3

SOLVED PAPER - 2015

[ 5

18. Power sharing is desirable because :		
		
(i) It helps to reduce the possibility of conflicts between social groups. This is called prudential reason.
		 (ii) Power sharing is the very spirit of democracy. This is called moral reason.
1½ + 1½ = 3
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2015)
		
Detailed Answer :
		
Power sharing is desirable in democracy because of :
		
(i) Prudential reasons :
		 (a) It helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between different social groups. Since social conflict often
leads to violence and political instability.
			(b) It is a good way to ensure the stability of political order.
			(c) Imposing the will of majority community over others may look like an attractive option in the short run,
but in the long run it undermines the unity of the nation.
		(ii) Moral reasons :
			(a) Power sharing is the very spirit of democracy. A democratic rule involves sharing power with those
affected by its exercise and who have to live with its effect.
			(b) People have a right to be consulted on how they are to be governed.
			(c) A legitimate government is one where citizens through participation, acquire a stake in the system.		
		
1½ + 1½ = 3
19. Sustainable development means continuous development for a long time. It takes care of the needs of present
generations without harming the environment for future generation.
		
 Economic development is a continuous process. Resources are to be used in such a way that they are not
exploited. At the same time development should not harm the environment.
1½ + 1½ = 3
20. (i) Primary Sector : It includes activities undertaken by using natural resource e.g. forestry, agriculture, fishing etc.
		
(ii) Secondary Sector : It includes various manufacturing activities and adds utility to primary sector e.g.
Cotton–cloths, iron ore-Steel etc.
		(iii) Tertiary Sector : It includes all such activities which support primary and secondary sector by providing
services e.g. transportation etc.		
1×3=3
21. Advantages of organized sector are :
		
(i) People enjoy security of employment.
		 (ii) Work for fixed hours.
		 (iii) If they work more they get overtime allowances.
		 (iv) Paid leaves, payment during holidays, medical benefits, safe working environment and pension after
retirement. (Or any other relevant point)
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
22. Factors that led to the Great Depression of 1929 :
		
 Agricultural overproduction remained a problem and it was made by falling agricultural prices.
		
 As prices slumped and agricultural incomes declined, farmers tried to expand production and bring a larger
volume of produce to the market but it pushed down prices.
		
 In the mid-1920s, many countries financed their investments through loans from the US, it was extremely
easy to raise loans in the U.S. when the economy was good.
		
 But in the first half of 1928, countries that depended crucially on US loan faced an acute crisis.
		
 The withdrawal of US loans affected the rest of the world in different ways. In Europe it led to the failure of
small major banks and the collapse of currencies such as the British pound sterling.
		
 In Latin America it intensified the slump in agricultural and raw material prices.
		
 The US attempt to protect its economy in the depression by doubling import duties also dealt another severe
blow to world trade.
1×5=5
OR
		
(i) Certain groups of weavers were in a better position than others as Indian fine textiles were in great demand.
Amongst weavers some produced course cloth while others wove finer varieties.
		
(ii) The demand for the finer varieties bought by the well-to-do was more stable. The rich could buy these even
when the poor starved.
		
(iii) Famines didnt’t affect the sale of Banarasi or Baluchari saris.
		
(iv) Moreover, mills could not imitate specialized weavers.

6 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

		
(v) Saris with woven borders or the famous lungis and handkerchiefs of madras, could not be easily displaced by
mill production.		
1×5=5
OR
		
(i) The vast mass of one room houses occupied by the poor were seen as a serious threat to public health.
		
(ii) Cities were overcrowded, badly ventilated, and lacked sanitation.
		
(iii) There were worries about fire hazards created by poor housing.
		
(iv) There was a widespread fear of social disorder, especially after the Russian Revolution in 1917.
		
(v) Worker's mass housing schemes were planned to prevent the London poor from turning rebellious.
1×5=5
23. (i) The print introduced a new world of debate and discussion and created possibility of wide circulation of
ideas.
		
(ii) Through printed message, people could persuade others to think differently and move them to action.
		 (iii) In early modern Europe, the implication of print was on a major sphere of life religion.
		 (iv) In 1517, Martin Luther wrote 'Ninety Five Theses' criticizing the evil practices of the Catholic Church.
		 (v) Martin Luther's ideas and writings were immediately reproduced in vast numbers and read widely. It led to
the beginning of Protestant Reformation.
		 (vi) Several scholars think that the print brought about a new intellectual atmosphere and helped in dissemination
of new ideas.
(Any five) 1 × 5 = 5
OR
		 The ways in which the novel in India attempted to create a sense of pan-Indian belonging were :
		
(i) Many historical novels were about Marathas and the Rajputs which produced a sense of pan-Indian belonging
in Bengal.
		
(ii) They imagined the nation to be full of adventure, heroism, romance and sacrifice. The novel allowed the
colonized to give a shape to their desires.
		
(iii) Bankim's Anandmath is a novel about a secret Hindu militia that fight Muslims to establish a Hindu kingdom.
It was a novel that inspired many kinds of freedom fighters.
		
(iv) Shivaji, the hero of the novel Anguriya Binimoy (1857) written by Budhadeb Mukhopadhayaya's (1827-94),
engages in many battle against clever and treacherous Aurangzeb, what gives him courage and grit is his
belief that he is a nationalist fighting for the freedom of Hindus.
		
(v) Imagining a heroic past was in which the novel helped in popularising the sense of belonging to a common
nation. It was another way to include various classes in the novel so that they could be seen as belonging to
a shared world.
		
(vi) Premchand's novel, for instance, are filled with all kinds of powerful characters drawn from all levels of
society.
(Any five) 1 × 5 = 5
24. Three geographical conditions required for the growth of rice are :
		
(i) It required high temperature, (above 25°C)
		 (ii) Annual rainfall above 100 cm.
		 (iii) High humidity
		 It is possible to grow rice in areas of less rainfall with the help of irrigation as in Punjab and Haryana. 1 × 5 = 5
25. Characteristics of Arid soil are :
		
(i) Red to brown in colour
		
(ii) Sandy in texture
		
(iii) Evaporation is faster, soil lacks humus and moisture
		
(iv) Soil occupied by Kankar
		
(v) Kankar restricts the infiltration of water.
1×5=5
26. (i) No constituency has a clear majority of one single caste.
		
(ii) No party wins the votes of all the voters of a caste or a community.
		 (iii) Vote Banks are based on castes or Community.
		 (iv) Many political parties put up a candidate from the same caste. Some castes have more than one candidate
while some do not have any.
		 (v) Ruling party and the sitting MP's and MLA's frequently lose elections.
1×5=5
27. (i) Democracy involves competition among various political parties. Their competition tends to divide society.
If they start competing in terms of some existing social divisions, it can make social division into political
division and lead to conflict, violence or even disintegration of a country.
		
(ii) Hundreds of civilians, militants and security forces were killed in the fight between Unionists and Nationalists
and between the security forces of the UK and the Nationalists. It was only in 1998, that the UK government
and the Nationalists reached a peace treaty after which the nationalists suspended their armed struggle.

[ 7

SOLVED PAPER - 2015

		
(iii) Political competition along religious and ethnic lines led to the disintegration of Yugoslavia into six
independent countries.
		
(iv) In a democracy, it is only natural that political parties would talk about the social divisions, make different
promises to different communities, took after due representation of various communities and make policies
to redress the grievances of the disadvantaged communities.
		
(v) Social divisions affect voting in most countries. People from one community tends to prefer some party to
others. In many countries, there are parties that focus only on one community.
1×5=5
28. Development means continuous progress or increase in real per capita income. In other words, there is
improvement in economic, welfare of the people and their standard of living.
		
The four characteristics of development are :
		
(i) Development goals are different for different people.
		 (ii) What may be development for one may not be development for the other.
		 (iii) For development, people look at a mix of goals.
		 (iv) Different persons could have different as well as conflicting notions of a country's development. 1 + 4 = 5
29.
S. No.

Organized Sector

Unorganized Sector

(i)

Terms of employment are regular.

Jobs are not regular.

(ii)

Security of employment.

No security of employment.

(iii)

Overtime payment for extra work.

No provision for overtime.

(iv)

Workers get paid leave and PF.

No other facilities like gratuity, medical benefits
etc.

(v)

Safe working environment.

Employers do not bother for these things.
(Any other points of distinction) 5

30.

Forest and
Mountainous

A
C

Manas
Tiger
Reserve
Maharashtra
Sugarcane
Producer
State

B

SRI
LANKA

		

I N D I A N

km 100 0 100

O C E A N

300

500 km

3



UNIT – I

India and the
Contemporary
World II
SYLLABUS

1

CHAPTER

THE MAKING
OF A GLOBAL
WORLD

(a) The Pre-modern World.
(b) The Nineteeth Century (1815-1914).
(c) The Inter-war Economy Rebuilding a World Economy : The Post War Era.
(d) Implications of globalization for livelihood patterns.
¾¾ Case Study : The post-war International Economic Order, 1945s to 1960s.

QUICK REVIEW
zz

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz
zz
zz

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

From ancient times, travellers, traders, priests and pilgrims
travelled vast distances for knowledge, opportunity and
TOPIC - 1
spiritual fulfillment, or to escape persecution.
The Pre-modern World and The
Nineteenth Century (1815-1914) .... P. 4
As early as 3000 BCE, an active coastal trade linked the Indus
valley civilization with present day West Asia.
TOPIC - 2
The silk routes are a good example of vibrant, pre-modern
The Inter-War Economy and Rebuilding a
trade and cultural links between distant parts of the world.
World Economy : The Post War Era .... P. 10
These routes existed even before the Christian Era and
flourished till the fifteenth century.
The Portuguese and Spanish conquest and colonisation of
America were decisively under way by the mid-sixteenth century.
Till the eighteenth century, China and India were among the world’s richest countries. Later America
gradually became important and the European continent emerged as a vast centre of world trade.
The history of industrialisation is a story of development and the modern age is the time of technological
development.
By the end of the nineteenth century, a global agricultural economy had developed, along with the
changes in pattern of labours migrations, capital flows ecologies and technology.
Trade flourished and markets expanded in the late nineteenth century.
Britain and France along with Germany and Belgium made vast additions to their overseas territories in
the late nineteenth century.
In the late nineteenth century, Europeans were attracted to Africa due to its vast resources of land and
minerals.
Indian traders and moneylenders also followed European colonisers into Africa for developing their
business in abroad.
The First World War (1914-1918) was mainly fought in Europe, but its impact was felt all over the world.
The First World War was fought between two power blocks :
(i) Allies—Britain, France and Russia (later joined by the US)
(ii) Central Powers—Germany, Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey.
Britain faced a prolonged economic crisis after the First World War. It became very difficult to recapture its
earlier position of dominance in the Indian market.
In the 1920s, the mass production became an important feature of industrial production in the USA.
The worldwide economic depression began around 1929 and lasted till the mid 1930s.
The new framework was agreed upon at the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference which
was held in July, 1944 at Bretton Woods in New Hampshire, USA.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank were established to preserve economic
stability and full employment in the industrial world.
G-77 was a group of developing countries in the late twentieth century, established to demand a new
international economic order.

2 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

KNOW THE TERMS
zzGlobal

(World Wide) : Involving all countries of the globe.

zzGlobalisation : Integrating economy of a country with the economics of other countries under the condition of free

flow of trade, capital and labour.
Route : The route taken by traders to carry silk cargoes from China to the West.
zzCowri : A Hindi word meaning ‘sea shells’. These were used in ancient world as a form of currency.
zzCoolies : Indian indentured labourers were referred to as coolies in the Caribbean islands.
zzCorn Laws : British laws which imposed restrictions on the import of corn.
zzDissenter : One who refuses to accept established beliefs and practices.
zzIndentured labour : A bonded labourer under contract to work for an employer for a specific amount of time, to
pay off his passage to a new country or home.
zzAllies : Before the First World War, Britain, France and Russia later joined by U.S.A. formed an alliance and fought
together in the First World War.
zzCentral Powers : An alliance formed by Germany, Austria, Hungary and Ottoman Turkey, who fought together in
the First World War.
zzAxis Powers : Germany, Italy and Japan were known as Axis Powers during the Second World War.
zzEl Dorado : The fabled city of gold.
zzExchange Rates : They link national currencies for purposes of international trade. There are broadly two kinds of
exchange rates namely fixed exchange rate and floating exchange rate.
zzFixed Exchange Rates : The rates which are officially fixed by the government and do not vary with change in
demand and supply of foreign currency.
zzFlexible or Floating Exchange Rates : These rates fluctuate depending on demand and supply of foreign currencies
in foreign exchanges markets, in principle without interference by governments.
zzTariff : Tax imposed on a country’s imports from the rest of the world. Tariffs are levied at the point of entry, i.e. at
the border or at the airport.
zzHosay : A riotous carnival in Trinidad when workers of all races and religions join to celebrate.
zzPlantation : Estate for cultivation of cash crops such as tea, coffee, cotton, tobacco, sugarcane etc.
zzRastafarian : A member of a Jamaican religious group which worships the former Emperor of Ethiopia, Haile
Selassie.
zzRinderpest : Cattle Plague —A fast spreading disease among cattle called cattle plague.
zzMNCs : Multinational Corporations (MNCs) are large companies that operate in several countries at the same time.
zzIMF : It is also termed as International Monetary Fund, the Bretton Woods institution. It was established to deal
with external surpluses and deficits of its member nations.
zzIBRD : It is abbreviated as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (popularly known as the
World Bank). It was set up to finance post-war reconstruction.
zzG-77 : G-77 or Group of 77 refers to the developing countries that did not benefit from the fast growth western
economies experienced in 1950s and 1960s.
zzSilk

KNOW THE DATES
zz3000

BCE : An active coastal trade linked the Indus Valley Civilization with present day West Asia.
- 15th Century : Existence of silk routes.
zzMid Sixteenth Century : Portuguese and spanish conquest and colonisation of America.
zz1845 - 1849 : Potato Famine in Ireland. During this famine around 1,000,000 people died of starvation in Ireland.
zz1885 : The big European powers met in Berlin to complete the division of Africa between themselves.
zz1890 : Global agricultural economy took shape.
zz1890s : Rinderpest (cattle plague) had a terrifying impact on livelihoods of the African people and the local economy.
zz1892 : Rinderpest reached Africa’s Atlantic coast.
zz1900s : Indian nationalist leaders began opposing the system of indentured labour migration as abusive and cruel.
zz1914-1918 : The First World War was fought.
zz1921 : Indentured labour was abolished.
zz1923 : America resumed exporting capital to the rest of the world and became the largest overseas lender.
zz1929-1935 : The Great Depression.
zz1939-1945 : The Second World War was fought.
zzJuly, 1944 : The United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference were held at Bretton Woods in New Hampshire,
USA.
zzBCE

[ 3

THE MAKING OF A GLOBAL WORLD
zz1947

: The IMF and the world bank commenced financial operations.
: The Chinese Revolution.
zzThe Late 1970s : MNCs began to shift production operations to Low-wage Asian countries.
zz1949

KNOW THE LINKS
1.
		
2.
		
3.
		

The Irish Potato Famine
http : //irishpotatofamine.net/
Rinderpest in Africa
http : //www.nda.agric.za
Indentured Labour
http : //www.nationalarchives.gov.uk

FLOWCHART
The Making of a Global World

Gloabalisation

Silk Routes

Multinational
corporations
(MNCS)

Development
of Technology

The World Wars

Indenture
Labourers

The Great Depression

Globalisation, an economic system that has emerged since the last 50 years.
It started with trade, migration of people in search of work and the movement of capital.
Silk Routes were the routes through which trade and cultural mingling of far-flung parts of the world took place.
Till the 15th century silk routes linked the rest of the world with Asia.
Food is a good example of long-distance cultural exchange. For instance noodles travelled west from
China to become spagetti.
Indentured labourers were hired under contracts of five years for plantation work in
the regions like Caribbean Islands, Mauritins and Fiji.
Indenture was nothing but a new system of slavery.
The important inventions like the railways, steamships and the telegraph triggered
the economic growth in 19th century.
The two World Wars were mainly fought in Europe, but its impact was felt all over the world.
These wars caused economic devastation and social disruption.
MNCs are large companies that operate in several countries at the same time.
The worldwide spread of MNCs was a notable feature of the 1950s and 1960s.
In order to preserve economic stability and full employment in the industrial world,
the post-war international economic system was established.
The IMF and the World Bank were designed to meet the financial needs of the industrial countries.

4 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

TOPIC-1

The Pre-modern World and The Nineteenth
Century (1815-1914)
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Where did the big European powers meet in 1885
for dividing Africa ?
Ans. Berlin.
1
Q. 2. Till the discovery of which place potatoes were not
known to people in Asia and Europe ?
Ans. America.
1
Q. 3. Which groups of countries was known as the
‘Allies’ in Europe ?
Ans. Britain, France and Russia later joined by the U.S. 1
Q. 4. Who was a well-known pioneer of mass production ?
Ans. Henry Ford.
1
Q. 5. Why did the wheat price in India fall down by 50
percent between 1928 and 1934 ?
Ans. Due to Great depression.
1
Q. 6. Which crop was not known to our ancestors until
about five centuries ago ?
Ans. Potato.
1
Q. 7. Identify the group of the countries, which was
known as Axis powers during the Second World
War ?
Ans. Nazi Germany, Japan and Italy.
1
Q. 8. Which were the main destination of Indian
indentured migrants ?
Ans. Caribbean Islands (mainly Trinidad and Guyana),
Surinam, Mauritius, Fiji.
(Any 2) 1
Q. 9. From which regions, most Indian indentured
workers came from ?

Ans. Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar Central Indian and
dry districts of Tamil Nadu.
1
Q. 10. What does ‘Silk Route’ refer to ?
Ans. Network of routes connecting Asia with Europe
and Northern Africa.
1
Q. 11. Which country has an effective right of VETO over
IMF and World Bank ?
Ans. USA later joined by the U.S.
1
Q. 12. What do we call the law that allowed the British
Government to restrict the import of corn ?
Ans. Corn Laws.
1
Q. 13. People’s livelihoods and local economy of which
country was badly affected by the disease named
‘Rinderpest’ ?
Ans. Africa.
1
Q. 14. Who discovered the continent of America ?
Ans. Christopher Columbus.
1
Q. 15. What was the most powerful weapon used by
Spanish to conquer America ?
Ans. Germs, for example : germs of small pox.
1
Q. 16. Into which riotous carnival the annual Muharram
procession was transformed in Trinidad ?
Ans. Hosay.
1
Q. 17. How did Rinderpest reach Africa ?
Ans. Through cattle imported to British Asia to feed
Italian soldiers.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. “Trade flourished and markets expanded in the 19th
century, but there was a darker side to process.”
Justify the statement.
[Board Term-1, 2015]
Ans.(i) In many parts of the world, these developments
meant loss of freedoms and livelihoods.
(ii) Late 19th century Europeans conquest brought
about many destructive economic, social and
ecological changes in the colonies.
(iii) In Africa, in the 1890s, a fast spreading disease of
cattle plague or rinderpest had a terrifying impact
on people’s livelihoods and the local economy.
(iv) The example of indentured labour migration from
India illustrates that it was a world of faster economic
growth for some and great misery and poverty for
others, technological advances in Europe and new
forms of coercion in Asia and Africa.(Any 3) 1×3=3

Q. 2. Explain the three impacts of the First World War on
the British economy. [Board Term-1, DDE-2015]
Ans. (i) After the war, Britain found it difficult to
recapture its earlier position of dominance in
the Indian market, and to compete with Japan
internationally.
(ii) Morecover, to finance war expenditures, Britain
had borrowed liberally from the US. This meant,
that at the end of the War, Britain was burdened
with huge external debts.
(iii) The War had led to an economic boom, that is a huge
increase in demand, production and employment.
When the war ended, production contracted and
unemployment increased.
(iv) At the same time, the government reduced bloated
war expenditures to bring them into line with
peacetime revenues. These developments lead to
huge job losses.
(Any Three) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 3. What was ‘Corn Law’ ? How was it abolished ? 		
		
Or
		What was the Corn Law ? Why was the Corn
Law abolished ? What was the result of the
abolishing ?
[Board Term-1, 2010 (B2)]
				
(NCERT)
Ans. (i) The laws allowing the British Government to
restrict import of corn is known as “Corn Law”.
(ii) These laws were abolished because the industrialists
and urban dwellers were unhappy with high food
prices; as a result of which they forced the abolition
of the Corn Laws.
Result : Food could be imported into Britain at a
more cheaper rate.
1×3=3
Q. 4. What attracted the Europeans to Africa ? Give any
three reasons. [Board Term-1, 2014 (R9UJGYG),
		
(X30T4XE), 2012 (55)]
Or
		 Why were Europeans attracted to Africa in the late
19th century ? Mention any three reasons.
		
[Board Term-1, 2011, 2010 (A1)]
Ans.(i) Europeans were attracted due to the resources
of land and minerals of Africa.
(ii) They came to Africa to establish plantations and
exploit mines.
(iii) African countries were militarily weak and
backward. So, it was easy to conquer them.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1×3=3
Q. 5. How did Rinderpest become instrumental in
subjugating the Africans ?
(NCERT)
				
[Board Term-1, DDE-2014]
Ans. (i) The loss of cattle destroyed African livelihoods.
(ii) Planters, mine owners and colonial governments
now successfully monopolised what scarce cattle
resources remained, to strengthen their power and
forced Africans into the labour market.
(iii) Control over the scarce resource of cattle enabled
European colonisers to conquer and subdue
Africa.
1×3=3
Q. 6. Explain the three types of flows within
international economy in exchanges.
				
[Board Term-1, DDE-2014]
Or
		
Mention the three types of flows within
international economic exchanges during the 19th
century.
[Board Term-1, 2012 (36)]
Ans. (i) Flow of Trade : Trade in goods, e.g., cloth
or wheat, giving shape to a global agricultural
economy where food no longer came from a
nearby village or town, but from thousands of
miles away.
(ii) Flow of labour : The migration of people in
search of employment is called flow of labour.
Nearly 50 million people emigrated from Europe
to America and Australia in the 19th century. All
over the world some 150 million are estimated
to have left their homes, crossed oceans and vast
distances over land in search of a better future.
(iii) Flow of capital investment : Investments over
long distances is called flow of capital investment.
Capital flowed from financial centres such as
London to build railways and other buildings.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 7. “19th century indenture had been described as
a new system of slavery.” Explain the statement
briefly.
[Board Term-1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]

[ 5
Ans. New system of slavery :
(i) Agents tempted the poor people by giving false
information about the nature of work, living and
working conditions, modes of travel etc.
(ii) Less willing workers were at time forcibly abducted
by the agents.
(iii) On arrival at the plantations, when labourers found
conditions to be different, many of them escaped
into the wilds while others developed new forms
of individual and collective self expression. 1×3=3
Q. 8. Write any three factors responsible for indentured
labour migrated from India.
				
[Board Term-1, NCT-2014, 2010 (C2)]
Ans. Factors responsible for indentured labour migrated
from India :
(i) In mid-19th century, cottage industries declined,
land rents rose, lands were cleared for mines and
plantations.
This affected poor people because they were highly
indebted and forced to migrated for work.
(ii) Temptation : As the agents provided false
information about final destinations, nature of
work and living and working condition, many
poor people were tempted to go and work.
(iii) In order to escape poverty or oppression at home
and in villages many migrants agreed to work.
		
1×3=3
Q. 9. Describe the effects of abolishing the ‘Corn
Laws’.
[Board Term-1, KVS-2014]
Or
		Explain three far reaching effects of the abolition
of the corn laws.
				
[Board Term-1, 2012 (37), 2011 (15)]
Ans. (i) Britain began to import foodgrains from rest
of the world. British agriculture was unable to
compete with imports.
(ii) Vast areas of land were now left uncultivated.
(iii) Thousands of men and women were thrown out
of work. They started migrating to cities.
(iv) Food prices fell and consumption in Britain rose.
(v) Other countries : Russia, America and Australia
sent food grains to meet the British demand.
(vi) They required railways to link the ports.
		
(Any three) 1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 10. Describe three major consequences of Second
World War.
[Board Term 1, 2013, 553K]
Ans. Major consequences of the Second World War are
as follows :
(i) Death and destruction were enormous. At least
60 million of the people or about 3 percent of
the world’s 1939 population are believed to have
been killed directly or indirectly as the result of
war.
(ii) Millions more were injured. Unlike in earlier
wars, most of these deaths took place outside
the battlefield. Many more civilians than soldiers
died from war-related causes.
(iii) Vast parts of Europe and Asia were devastated
and several cities were destroyed by aerial
bombardment or relentness artillery attacks.

6 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(iv) The war caused an immense amount of economic
devastation and social destruction. Reconstruction
promised to be long and difficult.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 11. State three reasons why Europeans fled to
America in 19th century.
		 [Board Term 1, 2013 (BHTK) 2011 (42), 2010 (B1)]
Ans. Europeans fled to America in 19th century
because :
(i) Until the 19th century, power and hunger were
common in Europe.
(ii) Cities were crowded and deadly diseases were
underspread.
(iii) Religious conflicts were common and religious
dissenters were persecuted.
(iv) In America, plantations were growing cotton and
sugar for the European market. These plantations
were worked on by slaves. (Any three) 1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 12. How did Henry Ford revolutionize mass
production in the U.S. ?
[Board Term-1, 2012]
Ans. (i) Henry Ford adopted the assembly line of a
Chicago slaughter house to his new car plant in
Detroit.
(ii) The assembly line allowed a faster and cheaper way
of producing vehicles. It forced workers to repeat a
single task mechanically and continuously.
(iii) This increased their efficiency in the single task and
the speed of production too.
(iv) Standing in front of the conveyor belt, no worker
could delay the motion or take a break.
(v) In the beginning many workers quits, since they
could not cope up with the stress of work.
(vi) Henry Ford doubled their wages and against that,
he not only increased the speed of the production
time but also banned trade unions.
(Any three)
		
1×3=3
Q. 13. Give three examples to show that the pre-modern
world changed with the discovery of new sea
routes to America.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40), 2011 (30, 31, 37)]
Ans. Three examples are as follows :
(i) Many common foods, e.g. potatoes, soya,
tomatoes, maize, etc., were introduced to Europe
from America. These crops made a difference
between life and death. The poor began to
eat better and live longer in England with the
introduction of potatoes.
(ii) Religious dissenters from Europe fled due to the
fear of persecution in Europe and migrated to
America.
(iii) Slave trade was started. European traders
captured slaves in Africa and took them to
America where they worked on plantations.
Europe became the centre of the world trade.
(iv) Precious metals, e.g., silver from mines located
in present day Peru and Mexico also enhanced
Europe’s wealth and financed its trade.
		
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Q. 14. The First World War was a war like no other
before. Explain any three features about the war
that support the statement.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (50)]
Ans. (i) It involved the leading industrial nations.
(ii) This war was the first modern industrial war.
Machine guns, tanks, aircrafts, chemical weapons,
were used on a massive scale.
(iii) Most of those who were aimed were men of
working age. The scale of death and destruction
was great. These deaths and injuries reduced the
workforce.
(iv) Industries during the war were restructured to
produce war-related products.
(v) The war led to the snapping of economic links
between the world’s largest economic powers
which were now fighting with each other to pay for
them. The war transformed the US from being an
international debtor to an international creditor.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 15. “Food offer many examples of long distance
cultural exchange.” Justify this statement.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (12, 17)]
Ans. (i) Traders and travellers introduced new crops to
the lands they travelled.
(ii) Noodles travelled west from China to become
spaghetti and Arab traders took pasta to Sicily.
(iii) Most of the common Indian food such as maize,
tomatoes, groundnuts, potatoes, soya and chillies
were not known to our ancestors. They were
introduced to Europe from America.
1×3=3
Q. 16. Why did European employers find it difficult to
recruit labour in Africa ? Give two methods they
used to recruit and retain labour.
		 [Board Term 1, 2011 (19, 29, 34, 40), 2010 (A1)]
Ans. (i) Because of shortage of labour willing to work
for wages and due to plenty of land and livestock
which were available for Africans.
(ii) Two methods used by the Europeans to recruit and
retain labour were :
		
(a) Heavy taxes were imposed which could be
paid only by working for wages on plantations
and mines.
		
(b) Inheritance laws were changed so that peasants
were displaced from land.
1×3=3
Q. 17. How did the global transfer of disease in the premodern world help in the colonization of the
Americans ?
(NCERT)
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (13, 25, 45), 2010 (C2)]
Ans. (i) America was not conquered and colonized by
Europeans with the help of superior fire power
alone.
(ii) Germs, such as those of small pox were a help to
great extent.
(iii) Americans had no immunity against them as a
result of long isolation. Once introduced, the germs
spread deep into the continent decimating whole
communities and paving way for conquest.
1×3=3

THE MAKING OF A GLOBAL WORLD

Q. 18. What is meant by ‘Trade Surplus’ ? Why did
Britain have a trade surplus with India ?
				

[Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]

Ans. Definition of trade surplus
(ii) Over the 19th century, British manufacturers
flooded the Indian market. Foodgrains and raw
material exports from India to Britain and the rest
of the world got increased. But the value of British
exports to India was much higher than the value
of British imports from India. Thus, Britain had a
‘trade surplus’ with India.
1+2=3
Q. 19. Explain the effect of the death of men of working
age in Europe because of the First World War ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A2)]
Ans. (i) Majority of the people killed in the first World
War were the men of working age. It reduced able
bodied workforce in Europe.
(ii) With fewer members within the family, household
incomes declined.
(iii) Women stepped in to undertake jobs that earlier
only men were expected used to do.
1×3=3
Q. 20. What role did technology play in shaping the
nineteenth century world ?
Ans. (i) Important inventions such as railways and
steamships boosted the economic growth in 19th
century.
(ii) Colonization stimulated new investments and
improvements in transport.
(iii) Faster railways, lighter wagons and larger ships
helped to move food more cheaply and quickly
from far away farms to final markets.
1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. “Trade and cultural exchange always went hand
in hand”. Explain the statement in the light of silk
route.
			 [Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC), (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. (i) The silk routes are a good example of vibrant
pre-modern trade and cultural links between
distant parts of the world.
(ii) The silk route was used by the Chinese traders to
export silk to other countries.
(iii) These routes were used by traders to trade goods
and exchange culture from one country to another.
(iv) Early Christian missionaries almost certainly
travelled through this route to Asia, like wise the
early Muslim preachers did few centuries later.
(v) These routes were also used to spread religions.
Buddhism emerged from Eastern India and spread
in several directions through interesting points on
the silk routes.
1×5=5
Q. 2. Explain the effects of the Great Depression of 1929
on the Indian economy.
				
[Board Term-1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Or
		How did the Great Depression of 1929 affect
the farmers and the middle classes in India in
different ways ?
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014, 2012 (34, 37)]
Ans. (i) India’s exports and imports nearly halved.
(ii) As international prices crashed, prices in India
also plunged.
(iii) Wheat prices in India fell by 50 percent.
(iv) Peasants and farmers suffered more than urban
dwellers.
(v) The colonial government refused to reduce
revenue demands.
(vi) India’s peasants indebtedness increased.
(vii) They used up their savings and sold jewellery and
precious metals. The great depression helped the
urban people especially the fixed income earners.
		
(Any five) 1×5=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Q. 3. Explain the three types of movement or flows
within international economic exchange. Mention
any one example of any one type of flow from
India and one from England.
				
[Board Term I, KVS-2014, 2012 (48)]
Ans. (i) The first movement is the flow of trade of
goods.
(ii) The second movement is the flow of people
migrating in search of employment.
(iii) The third movement is the flow of capital in terms
of short-term and long-term investments done
overseas.
(iv) Flow of goods and capital was smoother than the
flow of people. All three were benefitted by the
exchange of ideas.
India : Migration of indentured labourers ; trade
of cotton textile (any one).
Europe : Selling of Manchester goods in India.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 4+1=5
Q. 4. What were the main features of First World War ?		
		
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans.		The main features of the First World War are as
follows :
(i) The First World War (1914-18) was mainly fought
in Europe. But its impact was felt around the world.
(ii) It was fought between two power blocs —the
Allies (Britain, France and Russia) and the Central
Powers (Germany, Austria - Hungary and Ottoman
Turkey).
(iii) It lasted more than four years.
(iv) It was the first modern industrial war as it saw
the use of machine guns, tanks, aircraft, chemical
weapons, etc., on a large scale.
(v) To fight the war, millions of soldiers had to be
recruited from around the world and most of them
were men of working age.
(vi) During the war, 9 million people were dead and 20
million were injured.
(vii) These death and injuries reduced the able-bodied
workforce in Europe.

8 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(viii) Industries were restructured to produce warrelated goods.
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 5. What was Corn Laws ? Why were these laws
abolished ? How abolition of Corn Laws affect the
people in England ?
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		 What were ‘Corn Laws’ ? How did the abolition of
‘Corn Laws’ affect the people of England ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (12, 22, 44)]
Ans. Corn Laws : Refer Q. 3 Short Answer types
Effects : Refer Q. 9 Short Answer types
2+3=5
Q. 6. Describe in brief the economic conditions of the
post First World War period.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (BHTK)]
Ans. Post First World War period economic
conditions:
(i) Britain which was world’s leading economy in
the pre-war period faced a prolonged crisis.
(ii) Indian and Japanese industries were developed
as Britain was occupied with war.
(iii) After the war, it was difficult for Britain to
recapture its earlier position in the Indian market.
(iv) Britain was burdened with huge external debts
from the US.
(v) Government reduced bloated war expenditure.
This led to huge job loses and unemployment.
(vi) Grain prices were fallen step as wheat supply was
disrupted during the First World War. (Any five)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×5=5
Q. 7. What have the historians described the century
indenture as a new system slavery. Explain five
reasons.
[Board Term 1, 2013, 553K, 2012 (35)]
Ans. Indentured labour was described as a new
system of slavery because :
(i) Agents tempted the poor people by giving false
information about the nature of work, living and
working conditions, modes of travel, etc.
(ii) Less willing workers were at time forcibly
abducted by the agents.
(iii) On the plantation, the working conditions were
harsh and they had a few legal rights.
(iv) They were beaten or imprisoned for not being
able to meet tasks that used to be very heavy or
for running away from the job.
(v) Normal medical attention was given to them and
wages were deducted in case of absence at work
or failure to fulfill the task.
1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 8. Mention the two key lessons learnt from the interwar economic experiences by the economists and
politicians after the Second World War.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Ans. The two lessons learnt by the economists and
politicians during the Second World War were :
		First : An industrial society based on mass
production needs mass consumption. For mass

		
consumption, steady income was necessary and
for stable income, full employment was necessary.
For this, the government has to take step to
minimise the fluctuation of price, production and
employment. Hence, economic stability could be
ensured by the government intervention.
		Second : The goal of full employment could be
achieved only if the government controls the flow
of goods, capital and labour.
2½+2½=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 9. What is the meaning of ‘cultural fusion’ ? Give
two examples how indentured labour system led
to cultural fusion.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		“The indentured labour gave rise to a new culture
in the Carribean islands.” Justify this statement
with suitable examples. [Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]
Ans. (i) Cultural fusion is a phenomenon which
emerges when two or more cultures inter-mingle
and produce a new culture.
(ii) Indentured labourers used to live and work in
very harsh conditions. This forced them to seek
new avenues of comfort and relaxations. This
blended different cultural forms.
(iii) Examples :
		 (a) Hosay : In Trinidad, the annual Muharram
procession was transformed into a riotous
carnival called ‘Hosay’ in which workers of
all races and religions joined.
		 (b) Chutney Music : ‘Chutney music’ is another
creative contemporary expression of the post
indentured experience.
		 (c) Rastafarianism : The protest religion of
'Rastafarianism' is also said to reflect social
and cultural links with Indian migrants to the
Carribean.
(Any two) 2½+2½=5
				
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 10. Explain any three characteristics of the Silk
Routes.
(Board Term 1, 2012, 2011 (17) (39)]
Or
		Enumerate the importance of Silk Routes.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (17), 2010 (A1)]
Ans. (i) The silk routes are a good example of vibrant
pre-modern trade and cultural links between
distant parts of the world.
(ii) They were spread over land and sea knitting
together vast regions of Asia and linking with
Europe and Africa.
(iii) They existed since before the Christian Era and
thrived almost till the 15th century.
(iv) Chinese pottery, textiles and spices from India
travelled to Europe.
(v) In return, precious metals gold and silver flowed
from Europe to Asia.
(vi) Buddhism, Christian missionaries, Muslim
preachers also travelled through this route to
Asia.
(Any five) 1×5=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

THE MAKING OF A GLOBAL WORLD

Q. 11. Explain the destruction caused during the Second
World War. Mention two crucial influences which
shaped post-war reconstruction.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (39)]
Ans. (i) Unlike earlier wars, most of the deaths took
place outside the battlefields.
(ii) More civilians than soldiers died from war.
(iii) Vast parts of Asia and Europe were devastated.
(iv) Cities were destroyed.
(v) There was immense amount of economic
devastation.
Two crucial influences :
First : U.S’s emergence as military power in the
western world.
Second : Dominance of the Soviet Union.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3+2=5
Q. 12. How did the use of technology transform food
availability in Europe ? [Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Or
		What was the impact of technology on food
availability ? Explain with the help of examples.
		
(NCERT)
				 [Board Term 1, 2011 (580021, 23, 25, 35, 38)]
Ans. (i) Faster railways, lighter wagons and larger ships
helped food to reach more quickly from farms to
markets.
(ii) Earlier like animals were shipped from America to
Europe, many died on the way or became unfit to
eat. Thus meat became expensive.
(iii) Refrigerated ships : The animals could be
slaughtered at the starting point of America,
Australia or New Zealand and were brought
fresh.
(iv) This reduced the shipping cost and lowered prices
in Europe.
(v) The poor could add variety to their food and it
improved their living condition.
(CBSE Marking Seheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 13. Describe the social and economic effects of the
World War on England and USA.
				
[Board Term I, 2012 (4)]
Ans. Social Effects :
(i) Most ot the killed and maimed people were of the
working age and this affected the work force in
England.
(ii) Household income declined and women stepped
in to take up jobs.
(iii) Role and position of women changed forever in
England.
Economic Effects :
(i) Economic links between some of the major
economic powers of the world were snapped.
(ii) England borrowed large sums of money from US
Banks.
(iii) USA emerged as an international creditor.
(iv) USA owned more assets in foreign countries than
foreign countries owned in the USA.
(Any three) 3+2=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

[ 9
Q. 14. What was Rinderpest ? How did it adversely affect
the lives and fortunes of the Africans ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		What was Rinderpest ? How did Rinderpest
change the economy of the African Society ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (11, 44), 2010)]
Or
		 Describe briefly the effects of Rinderpest in Africa
in the 1890s.[Board Term 1, 2011 (24, 27, 33, 38, 39)]
Ans. Rinderpest was the fast spreading and devastating
disease of cattle plague.
Effects of Rinderpest :
It affected the Africans in following ways :
(i) Rinderpest moved like forest fire.
(ii) 90% of cattle were killed.
(iii) The loss of cattle destroyed African livelihoods.
Earlier people rarely worked for a wage. They
possessed land and livestock. Due to Rinderpest,
they were forced to work for wages and so it
affected the economy.
(iv) Colonial government forced the Africans into
labour market.
		
		 (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5
Q. 15. Explain how did the abolition of corn laws in
Britain led to the emergence of a global agricultural
economy ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (14, 26, 34)]
Ans. (i) With scrapping of corn laws, Britain began to
import foodgrains from rest of the world. These
products were relatively cheaper than the prices of
the British produced goods and foodgrains.
(ii) Britain was forced to import foodgrains from
Eastern Europe, America and Australia.
(iii) There were complex changes in labour movement
patterns, capital flow, ecology and technology.
(iv) Crops was not grown by a peasant tilling his own
land but by an agricultural worker.
(v) Food came from thousands of miles away.
(vi) Now food and other essential commodities were
transported by railways and by ships manned by
low paid workers from South Europe, Asia, Africa
and Carribean.
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 16. Explain why economy of USA was strong in the
early 1920s ? Would you agree that the roots of the
Great Depression lay in the ‘boom’ ? Give reasons
for your answer.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580031)]
Ans. (i) Mass production became a characteristic feature
of industrial production in the USA.
(ii) Mass production lowered costs and prices of
engineered goods.
(iii) There was a spurt in the purchase of refrigerators,
washing machines, etc., through hire purchase.
(iv) It was fuelled by a boom in house construction and
home ownership, financed once again by loans.
Yes, the roots of the Great Depression lies in this
boom because of the overproduction in industrial
and agricultural sector.
3+2=5

10 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 17. The 19th century world of faster economic growth,
still brought misery for many. Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (24)]
Ans. (i) Hundreds and thousands of Indians and Chinese
went to work on plantations, mines, railways, etc.
(ii) Indentured labourers were forced to sign contracts
restricting travel to their homes for five years.
(iii) As a result, cottage industry declined and land
rents rose. Land and forest were cleared for mines
and plantations.
(iv) Increased indebtedness among poor became
prevalent.
(v) Living and working conditions for the indentured
labour was harsh and with few legal rights. 1×5=5
Q. 18. Define the term “Trade Surplus”. How was the
income received from trade surplus with India
used by Britain ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580027, 28, 35)]
Ans. Trade Surplus : It is a situation in which the total

(i)

(ii)
(iii)

(iv)

(v)

value of export of a nation during the year exceeds
the total value of imports.
Over the 19th century, British manufacturers
flooded Indian market. Foodgrains and raw
material exports from India and Britain and world
were also increased.
Value of British exports to India were higher than
imports from India.
Britain, as such had “Trade surplus” with India.
Britain used this surplus to balance trade deficit
with other countries.
This is how a multilateral settlement system works
that allows one country’s deficit with another
country to be settled by its surplus with a third
country.
India played a crucial role in helping Britain to
balance its deficits. Britain’s trade surplus in India
helped paying the home charges that included
private remittances home by British officials and
traders.
1×5=5

TOPIC-2

The Inter-war Economy and Rebuilding a
World Economy : The Post War Era
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. In which year did the Great Depression start ?
Ans. 1929.
1
Q. 2. Name the first European country that conquered
America ?
Ans. Spain.
1
Q. 3. From which country did Britain borrow large
sums of money during the First World War ?

Ans. United States of America.
1
Q. 4. Who is referred to as the ‘Bretton Woods twins’ ?
Ans. The IMF and the World Bank.

1

Q. 5. What do you mean by G-77 ?
Ans. Group of developing countries.

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Mention three reasons for the creation of
International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank.
[Board Term I, 2015]
Ans. (i) The International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank were created to meet the financial needs of
the industrial countries.
(ii) When Japan and Europe rapidly rebuilt economies,
they became less independent on the IMF and the
World Bank.
(iii) Thus from the late 1950s the Bretton Woods
institutions, WB and IMF, began to turn their
attention towards newly developing countries.
(iv) The newly independent countries facing problems
of poverty came under the guidance of international
agencies dominated by the former colonial powers.
		
(Any 3) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 2. ‘China becomes an attraction destination for
investment by foreign MNCs in the 10th and 20th
centuries.’ Justify the statement.
				
[Board Term I, 2015]

1 mark each
1

3 marks each
Ans. China becomes an attraction destination for
investment by foreign MNCs in the 10th and 20th
centuries because :
(i) Wages were relatively low in countries like China.
(ii) Because of the low cost structure of the Chinese
economy.
(iii) TVs, mobile phones and toys we see in the shops
seem to be made in China.
1×3=3
Q. 3. Explain the following :
(a) G-77
(b) Great Depression of 1929.
[Board Term I, 2015]
Ans. (a) Organisation formed by the former colonies to
demand a New International Economic Order.
(b) It was a period of serious decline in production,
employment, income and trade.
1½ + 1 ½ = 3
Q. 4. Explain the role of New International Economic
Order (NIEO). [Board Term I, 2014, WQ7FXWC]
Ans. The Group of 77 or G-77 demanded a New
International Economic Order (NIEO). By the
NIEO they meant a System that would give them :

THE MAKING OF A GLOBAL WORLD

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Actual control over their natural resources.
More development assistance.
Fairer prices for their raw materials.
Better access for their manufactured goods in
developed countries, markets. (Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 5. “The relocation of industry to low-wage countries
stimulated world trade and capital flows.” Justify
the statement.
[Board Term I, 2014, (X30T4XE)]
Or
		Why did MNCs begin to shift their production
centres to Asian countries ? What were its
effects ?
[Board Term I, 2012 (48)]
Ans. (i) MNCs shifted their production units to Asian
countries because of cheap labour and low wages.
(ii) Availability of raw materials and a large market.
(iii) Effects : It stimulated world trade and flow of
capital. Countries like India, China and Brazil
underwent rapid economic transformation.
It generated employment opportunities and
introduced competition in the domestic markets.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 6. When was the Bretton Woods conference
convened ? State the main aim of the conference.
		
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		Describe the Bretton Woods Agreement.
(NCERT)[Board Term 1, 2011, (18, 22, 26, 32, 36)]
Ans. (i) The Bretton Wood Conference was convened
in July, 1944 at Bretton Woods in New Hampshire,
U.S.A.
(ii) Its main aim was to preserve economic stability and
full employment in the industrial world.
(iii) The conference established International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (World Bank).
1×3=3

[ 11
Q. 7. Why did most of the developing countries
organise themselves as a group - the Group of 77
(G-77) ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
Ans. (i) The developing countries came under the
guidance of IMF and World Bank which were
dominated by the former colonial powers in
order to uplift their economies.
(ii) Former colonial powers exploited the natural
resources of developing nations through IMF and
World Bank.
(iii) The developing nations organised themselves
into G-77 so as to gain real control over their
natural resources, to get more development
assistance and fairer prices for raw materials.
(iv) They also wanted a better opportunity for their
manufactured goods in the markets of developing
nations.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 8. What steps were taken by the economists and
politicians of the world to meet the global
economic crisis that arose after the Second World
War ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans. The steps taken are as follows :
(i) Bretton Woods Conference established IMF
to deal with external surplus and deficit of its
members.
(ii) The World Bank was set up to finance post-war
reconstruction.
(iii) Bretton Woods system was based on fixed
exchange rates.
(iv) Dollar was anchored to gold at a fixed price.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

5 marks each
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Explain any five factors that led to the Great
Depression of 1929.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, 2012 (40, 45)]
Or
		What do you know about Great Depression ?
Write any two causes of it.
[NCERT]
				 [Board Term 1, 2011, (26, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43),
				
2010 (B1)]
Ans. Great depression began around 1929 and lasted
till the mid 1930s. During this period, most parts
of the world experienced decline in production,
employment, incomes and trade. Agricultural
regions and communities were the most affected.
Causes of Great Depression :
(i) Post-world war economy of the world was fragile.
Agricultural over production was a problem. As
prices slumped, farm produce rotted.
(ii) Many countries financed loans from the U.S.
(iii) U.S. overseas lenders panicked at the sign of
financial crisis.
(iv) Thus, banks were bankrupt and were forced to
close down in Europe and in the US because they
were unable to recover investments, collect loans
and repay depositors.
(v) American capitalists stopped all loans.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1 × 5 = 5
Q. 2. How did the Great Depression of 1929 affect the
Indian trade ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2015]
Ans. Great Depression affected the Indian trade in many
ways :
(i) India’s exports and imports were halved between
1928 and 1934.
(ii) As international prices crashed, prices in India also
plunged.
(iii) Peasants and farmers suffered more than urban
dwellers.
(iv) Peasants producing for the world market were the
worst hit.
(v) Town-dwelling land owners and middle-class
salaried employees found themselves better off as
everything cost less.
5

12 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 3. Explain the effects of the Great Depression of 1929
on the United States. [Board Term 1, DDE-2015]
Ans. (i) With the fall in prices and the prospect of a
depression, the US banks also slashed domestic
lending, and called back loans.
(ii) Farmers were unable to sell their harvests.
(iii) Faced with falling income, many households in the
US could not repay what they had borrowed, and
were forced to give up their homes, cars and other
consumer durables.
(iv) Industrial production registered a fall of about
35%.
(v) The number of the unemployed started rising, and
in 1933, it touched 17 million. As unemployment
soared, people trudged long distances looking
for any work they could find. Ultimately, the US
banking system itself collapsed.
1×5=5
Q. 4. Discuss the factors that led to the end of
Bretton Woods System and the beginning of
globalization. [Board Term 1, 2012 (49), 2010 (C1)]
Ans. (i) US dollar no longer commanded confidence.
(ii) US dollar could not maintain its value in relation
to gold.
(iii) Collapse of fixed exchange rates on floating
exchange rates.

(iv) International financial system changed, and
developing countries were forced to borrow from
Western commercial banks.
(v) Industrial world was hit by unemployment.
(vi) MNCs turned to China due to its low
wages.
(Any five) 1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 5. What is G-77 ? What did the G-77 countries want
to gain from New International Economic Order ?
Describe.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Or
		What is G-77 ? What were its demands ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (13), 2010 (B2)]
Ans. G-77 or Group of 77 refers to the developing
countries that did not benefit from the fast
growth western economies experienced in 1950s
and 1960s. So, they organized themselves into
G-77.
They demanded :
(i) A new international economic order that would
give them real control over their natural resources.
(ii) More development assistance.
(iii) Fairer prices for raw material and
(iv) Better access for their manufactured goods in
developed countries’ markets.
1+4=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)



2

CHAPTER

THE AGE OF
INDUSTRIALIZATION

¾¾ Industrialization 1850s-1950s :
(i) Contrast between the forms of industrialization in Britain and India.
(ii) Relationship between handicrafts and industrial production–formal and informal sectors.
(iii) Livelihood of workers.
¾¾ Case Study : London and Bombay in the nineteenth century.

QUICK REVIEW
zz

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz
zz

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

In 1900, a popular music publisher E.T. Paull produced a
TOPIC - 1
music book that had a picture on the cover page, which
Industrialization in India .... P. 15
shows a goddess like figure bearing the flag of the new
century, standing on a wheel to symbolise time and her
TOPIC - 2
flight that symbolises progress.
Industrialization in Britain .... P. 20
The history of Industrialization is a story of development, and
the modern age is the time of technological developments.
Before the factories were started in England and Europe,
there was a large scale industrial production, known as Proto-Industrialization.
After the Industrial Revolution, the new machines and steam power were used in place of animal and
manual power for producing the things. The revolution replaced the cottage industry by the factories.
The earliest factories in England were set up in 1730.
Richard Arkwright created the cotton mill.
Industrial workers were known as factory workers.
The main industries of England were cotton and metal.
The worker in the mid-nineteenth century was a traditional craftsperson and labourer.
Before the introduction of machines in industries, silk and cotton goods from India dominated the
international market in textiles.
In England, the upper classes preferred things produced by hand because they were better finished and
especially designed.
Machine made goods were exported to colonies.
In colonial period, special preference or privileges were given to British goods which were imported in
India. British preferred their goods over Indian goods so that their industries could flourish at the cost of
the Indian industries.
Indian export market and the local market collapsed due to Manchester imports.
Many rich Indian businessmen also developed industrial enterprises in India.
The first cotton mill in Bombay came up in 1854. Jute mill came up in Bengal in 1855.
Some famous industrialists of nineteenth century were Dwarkanath Tagore, Dinshaw Petit, Jamsetjee
Nusserwanjee Tata, Seth Hukumchand, etc.
As colonial control over Indian trade tightened, it became difficult for the Indian merchants to function
with freedom.
By the first decade of the 20th century, a series of changes affected the pattern of industrialization.
Till the First World War, industrial growth was slow. Large scale industries were mostly located in Bengal
and Bombay.

14 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10
zz
zz

After the war, small-scale industries predominated in India. Handloom cloth production expanded
steadily.
From the very beginning of the industrial age, advertisements have played a part in expanding the
markets for products and in shaping a new consumer culture.

KNOW THE TERMS
zzOrient

: The countries to the east of the Mediterranean, usually referring to Asia.
: Indicates the first or early form of something.
zzProto-industrialization : Period before or beginning of industrialization.
zzSpinning Jenny : This machine was invented by James Hargreaves in 1764, It speeded up the spinning process and
reduced labour demand.
zzFly shuttle : This machine was invented by John Kay. It was helpful in speeding up the weaving.
zzMule : This machine was invented by Crompton in 1776. It has improved the spinning Jenny of Hargreaves.
zzGomasthas : They were the paid servants who were appointed by the East India Company to supervise weavers,
collect supplies and examine the quality of cloth.
zzFuller : A person who ‘fulls’ i.e., gathers cloth by pleating.
zzStapler : A person who ‘staples’ or sorts wool according to its fibre.
zzSepoy : An Indian soldier in the service of the British.
zzDyer : A person who dyes fabrics.
zzJobber : A person employed by the industrialists to get new recruits for the mills.
zzCarding : The process in which fibres, such as cotton or wool are prepared prior to spinning.
zzEntrepreneurs : A person, who makes money by starting or running businesses, especially when this involves
taking financial risks.
zzGuild : An association of craftsmen or merchants following the same craft. These guilds protected the interests of
the members and supervised the quality of the product and work.
zzMetropolis : A large, densely populated city of a country or a state, often the capital of the region.
zzVagrant : A person who has no home or jobs, especially one who begs.
zzProto

KNOW THE DATES
zz1600

: Establishment of the East India Company.
: The earliest factories in England came up.
zz1764 : James Hargreaves invented the Spinning Jenny.
zz1771 : Richard Arkwright created the first cotton mill.
zz1776 : A.D. Crompton invented ‘Mule’. It was a combination of Spinning Jenny and cotton mill.
zz1781 : James Watt patented the Steam Engine.
zz1781 : Mathew Boulton manufactured the new model of the steam engine.
zz1830-1840s : Dwarkanath Tagore set up six joint stock companies in Bengal.
zz1854 : The first cotton mill was set up in Bombay.
zz1855 : The first jute mill was established in Bengal.
zz1856 : The first cotton mill in Bombay started production.
zz1863 : London Underground Railway started operation.
zz1874 : The first spinning and weaving mill of Madras began its production.
zz1900 : Music publisher E.T. Paull produced a music book.
zz1912 : J.N. Tata set up the first iron and steel plant in India at Jamshedpur.
zz1917 : Seth Hukumchand, a Marwari businessman, set up the first Indian jute mill in Calcutta.
zz1730

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Proto - Industrialization
		www.pptpalooza.net

[ 15

THE AGE OF INDUSTRIALIZATION

2. History of Cotton Manufacture and Related Sites
		http://www.saburchill.com
3. Initial History of Textile Industry in India
		http://Karnatakaeducation.org.in

FLOWCHART

TOPIC-1

Industrialization In India
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Who worked for industrialists to get new
recruits ?
Ans. Jobber.
1
Q. 2. In which year did the first cotton mill in Bombay
(Mumbai) come up ?
Ans. 1854.
1
Q. 3. Where was the first cotton mill set up in India ?
Ans. Bombay.
1
Q. 4. Where were most of the large scale industries
located in 1911 ?
Ans. Bengal and Bombay.
1
Q. 5. What was ‘Spining Jenny’ ?
Ans. A machine which speeded up the spinning process
and reduced the labour demands.
1
Q. 6. Name any one problem faced by cotton weavers in
India.
Ans. They did not have good quality of cotton.
1
Q. 7. Why did the aristocrats and bourgeoisie prefer
hand-made goods in Victorian Britain ?
Ans. They symbolised refinement and class.
1

1 mark each

Q. 8. When did the exports of British cotton goods
increase dramatically ?
Ans. In the early 19th century.
1
Q. 9. Identify the person who got people from village,
ensured them jobs, helped them settle in cities
and provided them money in times of need.
Ans. Jobber.
1
Q. 10. Where was the first Indian Jute mill set up ?
Ans. Bengal.
1
Q. 11. Write down any one duty of Gomasthas ?
Ans. Supervising weavers.
1
Q. 12. Who set up the first Indian Jute Mill in Calcutta in
1917 ?
Ans. Seth Hukumchand.
1
Q. 13. What was the paid servant whom the company
appointed to supervise weavers called ?
Ans. Gomastha.
1
Q. 14. Which was the pre-colonial ports of India ?
Ans. Masulipatanam, Surat and Hoogly. (Any one) 1

16 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Short Answer Type Questions

3 marks each

Q. 1. How did industrial revolution give rise to
Capitalism ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]


Ans. (i) Imperialism as the ill-begotten child of
industrialization.
(ii) Industrialization chiefly needed two things.
One of them being the constant supply of rawmaterials and the other is that the finished goods
be sold at the same speed.
(iii) The industrialized countries had introduced
heavy import duties as protective tariffs to check
the import from other countries
(iv) Faced with the problem of finding new markets
for their products, the producer nations chose
such countries where industrialization had not
yet reached.
(v) Hence a race for bringing those areas under their
effective occupation or effective influence started
among the various industrialized nation.
(vi) As a consequence, Britain, France, Germany and
Japan, etc. set up their colonies in Asia, Africa and
South America etc.
(v) Hence a race for bringing those areas under their
effective occupation or effective influence started
among the various industrialized nations.
		
(Any there) 1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015)

Ans. The gomasthas were appointed by the British to
supervise weavers, collect supplies and examine
the quality of cloth.

Q. 2. Who were the Jobbers ? Explain their main
functions.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36)]
				
(NCT 2014)
Or
		Who was a Jobber ? Mention any two functions of
a Jobber.
[DDE-2015, Set-E][Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 12, 18)]
Ans. The jobber was a person with some authority and
he used to help the industrialists to get workers.
His role was to ensure job to worker and workers
to industrialists. He used to be an old and trusted
worker.
Functions :
(i) He got people from his village.
(ii) He ensured them jobs.
(iii) He helped the workers to settle in the cities.
(iv) He provided money in time of crisis. (Any two)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 3. Who were the Gomasthas ? Why did the weavers
and Gomasthas clash ?
[DDE-2015-16, Set-M]
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 24)]
Ans. (i) Gomastha were paid servants who were
appointed by East India Company to supervise
weavers, collect supplies and examine the quality
of cloth.
(ii) Clash between gomasthas and weavers : Refer to
Q. No. 3 of Long Answer Type Question.

Q. 4. Who were the ‘new gomasthas‘ ? How did they become
partners of the British management system ? 		
		
1+2=3
	
As time passed, new gomasthas who were outside
and did not have any long term social link with
the village acted arrogantly with the villagers,
marched into the village with sepoys and peons
and punished weavers for delays in supply-often
beating and flogging them. This was an act which
was very similar to the manner in which British
dealt with defaulters. In this manner gomasthas
became good partners in British management
system.
Q. 5. Why did East India Company appoint Gomasthas
in India ?
(NCERT)
				 [Board Term 1, NCT-2014, 2011 (5800, 14, 25)]
Or
		Describe any three functions of Gomasthas.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, 2011 (5800, 19) 2010 (C2)]
Ans. The East India Company appointed Gomasthas in
India due to the following reasons :
(i) Before 1760s, British cotton industries had not
expanded and Indian fine textiles were in great
demand in Europe.
(ii) East Indian Company wanted to expand exports
from India but French, Dutch, Portuguese and
local traders competed in the market.
(iii) The weavers and supply merchants could bargain
and try selling the products to the best buyer.
Hence they appointed Gomasthas to supervise and
collect supplies.
1×3=3
Q. 6. Describe any three main reasons for the decline of
textile exports from India in the 19th century.		
		 [Board Term 1, 2014, (X30T4XE), (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. (i) Britain imposed import duties on cotton textiles,
thus export market got declined.
(ii) Exports of British goods to India increased. Along
with Manchester goods flooded Indian markets.
(iii) The machine-made goods were cheaper and
weavers could not compete with them.
(iv) Raw cotton exports from India to Britain shot up
the prices of cotton.
(v) By 1850, reports from most weaving regions got
declined and desolated.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 7. Why did industrial production in India increase
during the First World War ? Give any reasons.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]

[ 17

THE AGE OF INDUSTRIALIZATION

Ans. (i) Manchester imports into India declined as
British mills were busy with war production.
(ii) Indian industries were also called upon to supply
war needs : such as jute bags, cloth for the army
uniform, tents and leather boots, horse and mule
saddles and a host of other items.
(iii) Even after the war, Manchester failed to recapture
its old position in Indian market.
1×3=3
Q. 8. Explain the effects of East India Company’s
exploitative methods of asserting monopoly over
trade.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. (i) The company tried to eliminate the existing
traders and brokers connected with cloth trade and
tried to establish a direct control over the weavers.
(ii) This was a situation of helplessness and desperation
which made the workers to revolt against the
British. The workers started to either change their
profession or migrated to other places.
(iii) These measures ultimately led to the elimination of
Indian weavers.
1×3=3
Q. 9. Describe the functions performed by supply
merchants in export trade.
				

[Board Term 1, 2013 (553K)]

Ans. (i) Supply merchants linked the port towns to the
inland regions.
(ii) They gave advances to weavers, procured the
woven cloth from wearing villagers and carried
the supply to the ports.
(iii) At ports, they had brokers who negotiated
the price and bought goods from the supply
merchants who were operating inland. 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 10. Explain any three problems faced by Indian
weavers in 1850s.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (58)]
Or
		What problems were faced by the Indian cotton
weavers in the 19th century ? Describe.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]
Or
		State any three problems faced by cotton weavers
of India ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 22, 38)]
Ans. The problems faced by Indian cotton weavers
continued. They were as follows :
(i) Their export market collapsed due to increase in
import duties on them in England.
(ii) Their local market shrank as they were flooded
with cheap Manchester imports.
(iii) They could not get sufficient supply of raw cotton
of good quality. When the American civil war
broke out and cotton supplies from the U.S. were
cut off, Britain turned to India.
Indian weavers were forced to buy cotton at a
very high price.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3

Q. 11. “The typical worker in the mid 19th century was
not a machine operator but the traditional crafts
person and labourer.” Support the statement with
examples.
				

[Board Term 1, 2012 (51), 2011 (5800, 23, 35)]

Ans. (i) Technological changes occurred slowly.
(ii) Machines broke down and repair was costly.
(iii) Machines were not as effective as inventors and
manufacturers claimed them to be.
(iv) There were no buyers for machines.
(v) Technology was
industrialists.

slow

to

be

accepted

by

(vi) Demand in market was often for goods with
intricate designs and specific shapes.
(vii) Aristocrats and bourgeoisie preferred things
produced by hands.
(viii)

These were
designed.

better

finished and carefully
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Q. 12. “Despite stiff competition from machine-made
thread, the Indian handloom production not only
survived, but also saw a steady growth in the
20th century.” Explain reasons in favour of your
answer.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (68)]
Ans. Reasons for growth of handloom production are :
(i) Adopting technological changes by the weavers to
increase production without raising the costs.
(ii) Those who catered to the rich always had a
demand for their goods. Examples : Beanarasi
and Baluchari Sarees.
(iii) Mills could not imitate specialized weavers.
Example : Sarees with intricate borders, lungis,
handkerchiefs.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 13. Trace the development of textile industry in
India.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 15, 26)]
Ans. The development of textile industry in India can be
traced in the following stages :
(i) First cotton mill came up in Bombay in 1854.
(ii) Around the 1860s, jute mills came up in Bengal.
(iii) These were followed by mills in Kanpur,
Ahmedabad and Madras.
1×3=3
Q. 14. Mention the name of three Indian entrepreneurs
and their individual contribution during the 19th
century.
[Board Term 1, 2010 (C1)]
Ans. (i) Dinshaw Petit, J. N. Tata and Seth Hukum
Chand are the three entrepreneurs.
(ii) Dinshaw Petit and J. N. Tata built huge industrial
empires. Seth Hukum Chand established the first
Indian Jute Mill.
1+2=3

18 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Describe the techniques which were adopted by
the Manchester industrialists to sell their goods in
India.
[Board Term 1, 2015 (C5JWEVD)]
Or
		
Explain with examples the importance of
advertisement in the marketing of goods.
				
[School of Yavatmal 2015]
Or
		How did the Indian and British merchants and
manufacturers advertise their products in India to
promote their sale ?
[Board Term 1, 2012, (48)]
Or
		Describe any five methods adopted by the British
manufacturers to take over the Indian market in
the beginning of 20th century.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (49)]
Or
		Analyse the different modes of advertisement
used by the producers to popularize their products
and promote sale in the 19th century India.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (65)]
Or
		“From the very beginning of the industrial age,
advertisements have played an important role
in expanding the markets for products and in
shaping a new consumer culture.” Explain the
statement citing suitable examples.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (69)]
Or
		How did the British manufacturers attempt
to take over Indian market with the help of
advertisement ?
[Board Term 1, 2011, (A1)]
Or
		What measures were adopted by the producers in
India to expand the market for their goods in the
19th century ?
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]
Ans. (i) The Manchester made cloth carried a label
with ‘Made in Manchester’ written in bold. This
assured the buyers of the quality of the cloth.
(ii) The British manufacturers used images of Indian
Gods and Goddesses on the labels. It symbolized
the divine approval for the commodity. It also
created familiarity with the Indian buyers.
(iii) Manufacturers got calendars printed with the
images of Gods and the advertisement of their
products.
The calendars were seen on the walls of hotels, tea
shops, households, etc. These are used even by
people who could not read.
(iv) Images of historical characters and heroes from
the past were also displayed on calendars thus
sending the message that the product was as
worthy of respect as were these respectable
characters.

5 marks each
(v) The Indian manufacturers printed the image
of Bharat Mata and a nationalist message on
the labels. They also printed ‘Made in India’
on the labels thus appealing to the nationalist
sentiments. Most of the baby products carried the
image of Lord Krishna to appeal to the religious
sentiments.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 2. “The First World War created the favourable
conditions for the development of industries
in India”. Support the statement with suitable
examples.
[Board Term I, KVS-2014]
Or
		How did the First World War proved to be a boon
to the Indian Industries ? Explain.		
		
[Board 2013, Term I (553K), 2012 (35)]
Or
		Explain the peculiarities of Indian Industrial
growth during the First World War.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
Or
		How did Industrial production in India increase
during the First World War ? Explain any five
points.
(NCERT) [Board Term I, 2012, (58)]
Or
		
“The First World War created unfavourable
conditions for the development of industries in
India.” Explain.
[Board Term I, 2012, (37)]
Or
		‘The First World War turned out to be a boon in
disguise for the Indian industries.’ Justify the
statement with suitable arguements.
		[Board Term I, 2012 (63), 2011 (5800) 12, 23, 28,
		
31, 45]
Ans. (i) The First World War created a dramatically
new situations. Till then industrial production
had been slow.
(ii) British mills were busy with war production and
so their imports into India declined.
(iii) Indian mills now had a vast home market for
supply.
(iv) As the war prolonged, Indian factories were called
upon to supply war needs, jute bags, cloth for
army uniforms, tents, leather boots, horse and
mule saddlers and many other items.
(v) Many workers were employed as new factories
were set up and old ones ran in multiple shifts.
(vi) Over the war years, industrial production
boomed. Manchester would not able to capture
its old position in the Indian market after the war.
Cotton production collapsed and export of cotton
cloth from Britain fell.
(Any five) 1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

[ 19

THE AGE OF INDUSTRIALIZATION

Q. 3. Why were there frequent clashes between
Gomasthas and weavers in the villages ? Explain
five reasons. [Board Term 1, DDE-2014, 2012 (52)]
Ans. There were frequent clashes between Gomasthas
and weavers in the villages because of the
following reasons :
(i) Earlier supply merchants often belonged to the
same villages and had a close relationship with
the weavers.
(ii) The company’s appointed Gomasthas were
outsiders, with no long-term social link with the
villagers.
(iii) They acted arrogantly, marched into villages with
sepoys and peons and punished weavers for
delays.
(iv) The weavers could no longer bargain for prices
or sell to other buyers in place of the British who
paid them low wages.
(v) In many places, Carnatic (Karnataka) and Bengal
weavers deserted villages, migrated or revolted
along with the village traders.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 4. Why was a jobber employed ? How did a jobber
misuse his position and power ? Explain.
				

[Board, 2013 Term 1, BHTK]

Ans. Jobber was employed to get new recruits for the
factories or industrialists.
		 The jobber misused his position and power in the
following ways :
(i) Initially jobbers cured people from his village
ensuring them jobs. He also helped them settle in
the city and lent them money in the time of crisis.
(ii) Gradually, jobbers got position and power.
(iii) They started demanding money and gifts for all
the favours.
(iv) They also started to control the lives of the
workers.
(v) Jobbers got people from his own village and
restricted entries of others in the mills.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×5=5
Q. 5. What steps were taken by the East India Company
to control the market of cotton and silk goods ?
What was its impact ? [Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Or
		How did the East India Company procure regular
supplies of cotton and silk textiles from Indian
weavers ?
Ans. (i) The East India Company tried to eliminate the
existing traders and appointed 'Gomasthas' as
supervisors.
(ii) The system of advances was introduced to have a
direct control over the weavers.
Impact :
(i) Weavers devoted entire time to weaving.

(ii) They were forced to accept the prices fixed by the
company.
(iii) There were reports of clashes of weavers with
gomasthas.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2+3=5
Q. 6. How did the Indian industries develop in the 19th
and 20th centuries ? Explain.
				

[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]

Ans. (i) The early industrialists avoided a direct
competition with British factories.
(ii) The cotton mills started to produce coarse cotton
yarn and this was exported to China.
(iii) As Swadeshi Movement gathered momentum,
industrialist pressurised government to increase
tariff protection.
(iv) Exports to China declined and domestic markets
were taken over by China.
(v) During the First World War, British government
called upon the Indian mills to produce goods
such as jute bags, boots, etc., for British Army.
(vi) As the war prolonged, England could not capture
the Indian markets.
(Any five)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 7. “The establishment of political power by the East
India Company resulted in ruination of the Indian
weavers.” Support the statement with suitable
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (67)]
Ans. On earning to power the British East India
Company asserted a monopoly right to trade.
It developed a system that would eliminate
competition, control cost and ensure regular
supply of cotton and silk goods. These measures
ultimately led to the ruination of Indian weavers.
		
The measures adopted were as follows :
(i) The company tried to eliminate the existing
traders and brokers connected with cloth trade
and establish a direct control over the weavers.
It appointed a paid servant called Gomastha
to supervise the weavers, collect supplies and
examine the quality of cloth.
(ii) The company weavers were prevented from
selling to other buyers. The weavers were tied
to the company by a system of advances. Loans
were given to the weavers for production and
they had to handover the finished products to the
Gomasthas.
The price that the weavers received was low, but
they had no choice but to sell their goods to the
British because the loans tied them to the British.
This was a situation of helplessness and desperation
made them to revolt against the British. They quit
their profession and migrate to other places.
5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

20 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 8. How did the handloom industry collapse in India
under the British rule ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (47), 2011 (5800, 17, 32, 22,
		
27, 40, 44)]
Or
		Analyse the causes leading to the decline of the
Indian weaving industry in the 19th century.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (70)]
Or
		Explain any five factors responsible for the
decline of the cotton textile industry in India in
mid-nineteenth century.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55, 59)]
Or
		Why did the handloom industry collapse in India
during the 19th century ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (62)]
Ans. (i) Factories in Manchester started producing
cotton textiles for the domestic market.

(ii) The government put more import duties on the
textile coming from India to encourage the local
industries. As a result, the Indian weavers lost
their overseas market.
(iii) Eventually, the Manchester goods started
flooding the Indian markets also and it became
difficult for the Indian weavers to compete with
the low cost Manchester cloth.
(iv) The British government in India also levied more
taxes on the handloom units which made the
Indian textiles costlier in Indian markets when
compared to the Manchester textiles.
(v) The Civil War in USA forced the British to buy
more raw cotton from India for their Manchester
textile industries. This created an acute shortage
of raw material for the weavers and the Indian
handloom industry collapsed.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5

TOPIC-2

Industrialization In Britain
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Who manufactured the new model of the steam
engine in 1781 ?
Ans. Mathew Boulton.
1
Q. 2. What does Industrial revolution refer to ?
Ans. Mass production by factories.
1
Q. 3. When did the earliest factories come up in
England ?
Ans. In 1730s.
1
Q. 4. Who improved the steam engine produced by
Newcomen ?
Ans. James Watt.
1
Q. 5. Who produced a popular music book that had a
picture on the cover page announcing the Dawn
of the Century ?
Ans. E.T. Paull.
1
Q. 6. How was the Nationalists message of Swadeshi
spread ?
Ans. Through advertisements.
1
Q. 7. What is proto-industrialization ?
(NCERT)

1 mark each

Ans. It was a possible phase in the development of
modern industrial economics that preceded and
created conditions for the establishment of fully
industrial societies.
1
Q. 8. Name the first country to undergo industrial
revolution.
Ans. Britain.
1
Q. 9. Which mechanical device was used for weaving
with ropes and pullies, which helped to weave
wide pieces of cloth ?
Ans. Fly shuttle.
1
Q. 10. Which ports had trade links with South Asian
ports ?
Ans. Masulipatanam, Hoogly and Surat.
1
Q. 11. Which Indian port lost its importance during
colonial rule ? Why ?
(NCERT)
Ans. Surat. The European companies gradually gained
power by securing a variety of concessions from
local counts and acquiring the monopoly rights of
trade.
1

3 marks each
Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why has the Surat and Hoogly ports declined by
the end of 10th century ? Explain any three reasons.
Ans. Surat decline by the end of 18th century.
(i) The port of Surat declined mainly because of the
growing power of the European Companies in
India.
(ii) These European Companies gradually gained
power and started to control sea-trade in India.
(iii) They secured a variety of concessions which they
obtained from local court and by gaining monopoly
rights to trade.
(iv) These companies did not want to use the old ports
of Surat, Masulipatanam, and Hoogly etc.
(v) Instead they developed the ports of Bombay.
Q. 2. “In the eighteenth century Europe, the peasants
and artisans in the countryside readily agreed
to work for the merchants.” Explain any three
reasons.
[DDE-2015-16, Set-M]
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQTFXWC)]
Or
		In the 17th century merchants from towns in
Europe began. Employing peasants and artisans
within the villages. Explain.
(NCERT)

THE AGE OF INDUSTRIALIZATION

Ans. (i) Many peasants had tiny plots of land which
could not provide work for all members of the
household.
(ii) So when merchants came around and offered
advances to produce goods for them, peasant
households eagerly agreed.
(iii) By working for the merchants, they could remain
in the countryside and continue to cultivate their
small plots.
(iv) Income
from
proto-industrial
production
supplemented their shrinking income from
cultivation. It also allowed them a fuller use of their
family labour resources.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 3. Describe the contributions of Dwarkanath Tagore
as an entrepreneur of Bengal.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, School of Yavatmal]
Ans. (i) Dwarkanath Tagore believed that India
would develop through westernization and
industrialisation.
(ii) He invested in shipping, shipbuilding, mining,
banking, plantations and insurance.
(iii) Dwarkanath Tagore made his fortune in China
trade before he turned to industrial investment,
setting up six joint stock companies in the 1830s
and 1840s.
1×3=3
Q. 4. Explain the role played by advertisements in
creating new consumers for the British products.
		
[Board Term 1, 2014, (X30T4XE)]
Ans. (i) Advertisements make products appear desirable
and necessary.
(ii) They try to shape the minds of people and create
new needs.
(iii) If we look back into history, the very beginning
of the industrial age, advertisements have played
a very vital role in expanding the markets for
products and in shaping a new consumer culture.
1×3=3
Q. 5. “The upper classes, during Victorian period,
preferred things produced by hands.” Explain.
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014, (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. The upper classes, during Victorian period
preferred things produced by hands because :
(i) They symbolised refinement and classic.
(ii) They were better finished.
(iii) They were individually produced and carefully
designed.
1×3=3
Q. 6. “Although wages increased somewhat in the
nineteenth century but they could not improve
the welfare of the workers.” How do you agree
with this statement ? Explain any three points.
		
[Board 2013, Term I, BHTK]
Ans. (i) The average figures hide the variations
between trades and fluctuations from year to
year.
(ii) The real value of workers’ income fell significantly,
since the same wages could now buy fewer
things.
(iii) The workers did not get employment everyday,
hence the number of days worked determined
the average daily income of the workers.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3

[ 21
Q. 7. What is meant by proto-industrialization ? Why
was it successful in the countryside in England in
the 17th Century ?
		[Board Term 1, 2012 (40), 2011 (580032, 37, 17,
		
39, 43)]
Ans. Proto-industrialization was the early phase of
industrialization in Europe and England when
there was large scale industrial production for
an international market. This was not based on
factories.
		
It was successful in the countryside in England
due to the following reasons :
(i) The peasants had been shut out of village
commons due to enclosure movement.
(ii) They now looked for alternative source of income
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Q. 8. Why did technological changes occur slowly in
Britain in early nineteenth century ? Explain any
three reasons.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (59)]
Or
		
“Technological changes occurred slowly in
Britain.” Give three reasons for this.
				 [Board Term 1, 2011(5800, 24, 40), 2010 (B2)]
Ans. (i) New technology was expensive and merchants
and industrialists were cautious about using it.
(ii) The machines often broke down and repair was
costly.
(iii) They were not much effective as compared to
cheap labour.
1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 9. How did the abundance of labour in the market
affect the lives of worker in Britain during the 19th
century ? Explain with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580027)]
Ans. Abundance of labour in the market affected
the lives of the workers in Britain in following
ways :
(i) The work available in most of the industries were
seasonal. So workers had long period without
work. Many returned to the countryside. But most
of them looked for odd jobs.
(ii) Most of the workers had to wait for weeks or more
to get job. They had to spend nights under bridges
or in night shelters.
(iii) Wages had increased somewhat in the early
nineteenth century. When prices rose sharply
during the prolonged Napoleonic war, the real
value of what the workers earned fell significantly,
since the same wages could now buy fewer things.
1×3=3
Q. 10. Mention any three restrictions imposed by the
British government upon the Indian merchants in
the 19th Century ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 11, 13, 28, 45)]
Ans. Restrictions imposed by the British government
upon the Indian merchants were :
(i) The colonial control over Indian trade tightened
and space within which Indian merchants could
function became limited.
(ii) They were barred from trading with Europe in
manufactured goods.
(iii) They had to export mostly raw materials and
foodgrains.

22 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(iv) They were also gradually edged out of the shipping
business.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 11. Why there was no shortage of human labour in
Victorian Britain in the mid of nineteenth century?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 16, 27)]
Ans. (i) Poor peasants and vagrants moved to cities in
large number in search of jobs, waiting for work.
(ii) There was plenty of labour and their wages were
low.
(iii) Industrialists had no shortage of labour.
(iv) They did not want to introduce machines or large
investments.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 12. Why did women workers in Britain attack the
Spinning Jenny ? Give any three reasons.
		(NCERT) [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 24, 33, 34, 36)]
Ans. (i) The Spinning Jenny speeded up the spinning
process and reduced labour demands.


(ii) Many workers were left without any job and
became unemployed.
(iii) By the use of this machine, a single worker could
make a number of spindles and spin several
threads. That is why the women workers attacked
Spinning Jenny.
1×3=3
Q. 13. After industrial development in England, what
steps did the British government take to prevent
competition with the Indian textile ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]
Ans. (i) The British government imposed import duties
on cotton textiles so that Manchester goods could
be sold in Britain without competition.
(ii) It persuaded the East India Company to sell the
British manufactured goods in Indian market.
(iii) It increased the export of British cotton goods.
(iv) It decreased the Indian imports into Britain.
(Any three) 1×3=3

5 marks each
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why did London city dwellers become rebellious
during 19th century.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) The vast mass of one room houses occupied by
the poor were seen as a serious threat to public
health.
(ii) Cities were overcrowded, badly ventilated, and
lacked sanitation.
(iii) There were worries about fire hazards created by
poor housing.
(iv) There was a widespread fear of social disorder,
especially after the Russian Revolution in 1917.
(v) Worker's mass housing schemes were planned to
prevent the London poor from turning rebellious.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1×5=5
Q. 2. Why were Victorian industrialists not interested
to introduce mechanism in England ? Give any
four reasons.
Or
		Why did some industrialists in the 19th century
Europe prefer hand labour over machines ?
Explain.
[NCERT]
		[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 25, 19, 26, 36, 39, 42, 43)]
Or
		Why could mechanical technology not replace
human labour in Victorian Britain ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-Set M, 2015]
Ans.(i) In victorian Britain, there was no shortage of
human labour, so industrialists had no problem of
labour shortage or high wage costs. They did not
want to introduce machines that got rid of human
labour and required large capital investment.
(ii) In many industries the demand for labour was
seasonal. Gas works and breweries were especially
busy through the cold months. So they needed
more workers to meet their peak demand. Book
binders and printers, catering to X-mas demand,
too needed extra hands before December.
(iii) A range of products could be produced only with
hand labour. Machines were oriented to produce
uniform standardised goods for a mass market. But
the demand in the market was often for goods with
intricate designs and specific shapes.
(iv) The aristocrats and bourgeoisie preferred things
produced by hand in Victorian Britain. Hand-made
products came to symbolise refinement and class.
(v) Hand-made products were better finished,
individually produced and carefully designed.
1×5=5
Q. 3. What was ‘proto-industrialization’ ? Explain the
importance of proto-industrialization.
[DDE-2015, Set-M]
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (WQ7FXWC
		
(NCT-2014)]
Or
		 What is meant by Proto-industrialization ? Explain
any four economic effects of the Proto-industrial
system.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (60), (40)]
Or
		What is meant by Proto-industrialization ? How
did it affect the rural peasants and artisans ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36)]
Ans. Proto-industrialization refers to the system
of industries that existed in Europe before
the arrival of modern machine run factories.
Large scale industrial production took place
for an international market. It was based in the
countryside, not in factories.
Effects :
(i) Open fields were disappearing and commons
were being enclosed so common people had no
alternative sources of income.
(ii) Many had small plots of land which could not
provide work for all family members.
(iii) Merchants offered them advances for which they
agreed.
(iv) They got a source of income which supplemented
their shrinking income from cultivation.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015, 2012) 1+4=5

THE AGE OF INDUSTRIALIZATION

Q. 4. Explain the process of industrialization in Britain
during the nineteenth century.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014, (X30T4XE)]
Or
		
What
were
the
principal
features
of
Industrialization process of England in 19th
century ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 14, 35)]
Ans. (i) Cotton industry grew rapidly followed by iron
and steel industry.
(ii) Introduction of railways added to industrial
growth.
(iii) New factories could not displace traditional
industries.
(iv) Industries tried to improve their speed and quality
of production.
(v) Implementation of technology happened at a slow
rate.
1×5=5
Q. 5. Describe any five major problems faced by new
European merchants in setting up their industries
in towns before the industrial revolution.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Ans. (i) Due to the expansion of world trade, the
merchants wanted to expand their production.
But trade and craft guilds were very powerful.
(ii) They could create money problems for the
merchants in their town.
(iii) Rulers had granted different guilds and the
monopoly rights to produce and trade in specific
products. So merchants were handicapped in
towns.
(iv) Guilds regulated competition and prices.
(v) In the countryside, peasants and artisans were
available for work.
1+5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 6. “Getting a job in factories was always difficult in
the 19th century.” Justify the statement comparing
the case of England and India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Ans. (i) England : The actual possibility of getting a job
depended on existing network of friendship and
kin relationship. A person was more likely to get
a job if he had a friend or a relative working in the
factory. Many who did not have connections had
to wait for weeks spending nights under bridges
or in the night shelters.
(ii) India : In India, the member of job seekers was
always more than the jobs available. Industrialists
usually employed jobbers, who usually were old
and trusted workers to get new recruits.
The jobber got people from his village, ensured
them job and helped them settle in the city.
Jobbers eventually began demanding money for
the favours they showed and controlled the lives
of workers.
2½×2=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 7. Describe the life of the workers in Victorian
Britain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (50)]
Ans. (i) Labour was in abundance.
(ii) Job opportunities were few.

[ 23
(iii) Job seekers who came from villages had to spend
the night under bridges or in night shelters and
they had no place to stay in the city.
(iv) Much of the work was seasonal in nature such as
book binding.
(v) Wages were low and life was difficult when prices
of goods in the city rose sharply.
(vi) Workers had to look for odd jobs when they could
not find proper employment in factories.
		
(Any five)
1×5=5
Q. 8. Enumerate the features of the proto-industrial
system.
[Board Term 1, 2010 (B1)]
Ans. (i) It was a decentralised system of production.
(ii) Control on production was in the hands of
merchants but goods were produced by a vast
number of producers working in their family farms.
(iii) Whole family was involved in such a system.
(iv) Each merchant was controlling hundreds of
workers.
(v) By working for their merchants, workers could
remain in the countryside and continue to cultivate
their small plots.
1×5=5
Q. 9. Explain, from where did the workers come and
how did they get job in Industry in the early
twentieth century ? [Board Term 1, 2011 (23, 27)]
Ans. (i) As the news of employment spread, workers
travelled great distances in the hope of work in the
mills. For instance, from the United Provinces, they
went to work in the textile mills of Bombay and in
the jute mills of Calcutta.
(ii) Getting job was always difficult, even when
mills multiplied and the demand for the workers
increased. The numbers seeking work were always
more than the job available.
(iii) Entry into the mills was also restricted. The actual
possibility of getting a job depended on existing
networks of friendship and personal relations.
(iv) Industrialists employed jobbers to get new recruits.
Very often the jobber was an old and trusted
worker. He got people from his village, ensured
them job, helped them settle in the city and
provided them with money in times of crisis.
(v) The jobber became a person with some authority
and power. He began demanding money and gift
for his favour and controlling the lives of workers.
1×5=5
Q. 10. How did the Industrial Revolution in England
affect Indian economy ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 18)]
Ans. Affects of Industrial Revolution in England on
Indian Economy :
(i) Before the Industrial Revolution, India was a major
producer of cotton and indigo, spices but after
revolution it suffered a set back.
(ii) Industrial Revolution enabled England to produce
more and more goods at cheaper rates. So they
chose India as a vast market.
(iii) The industrial revolution threw the Indian artisans
and handicrafts out of jobs.
(iv) Heavy duties were imposed on Indian goods.
		
1¼×4=5



3

CHAPTER

WORK, LIFE
AND
LEISURE

(i) Characteristics of the city.
(ii) Social change in the city.
(iii) Politics in the city.
(iv) The city in colonial India.
(v) Cities and the challenge of Environment.
¾¾ Case studies : London and Bombay in the 19th and 20th century.

QUICK REVIEW
zz

Though urbanization has a long history, the modern city
worldwide has developed only over the last 200 years.

zz

3 historical processes have shaped modern cities namely :
(i)

rise of industrial capitalism,

(ii) the establishment of colonial rule over large parts of the
world.

TOPIC - 1
London in the 19th and
20th Century .... P. 27
TOPIC - 2
Bombay in the 19th and
20th Century .... P. 31

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

(iii) development of democratic ideals.
zz

In 1851, more than three quarters of the adults living in Manchester were migrants from rural areas.

zz

As London grew crime, flourished; 20,000 criminals resided in London in the 1870s.

zz

The 1861 census recorded a quarter of a million domestic servants in London, of whom a large portion
were women.

zz

Andrew mearns, a clergyman who wrote ‘The Bitter Cry of outcast London” in the 1880s showed why
crime was more profitable than labouring in small underpaid factories.

zz

Individual landowners of London put up cheap, and usually unsafe, tenements for the new migrants.

zz

A variety of steps were taken to clean up London.

zz

By 1880 the expanded train service was carrying 40 million passengers a year in London.

zz

London tube railway led to a massive displacement of the London poor, between the two world wars.

zz

A new feeling of individualism cropped up in cities where the public space became increasingly male
dominated and women controlled the domestic sphere.

zz

On one side for the wealthy Britishers, long series of annual ‘London Season’ was held; on the other hand,
in the severe winter of 1886, several poor Londoners exploded in a riot. When the same was repeated in
1887 it was brutally suppressed by the police. This incident was named Bloody Sunday of November 1887.

zz

The pace of urbanisation in India was slow under the colonial rule.

zz

In India, a large proportion of these urban dwellers were residents of the three Presidency cities.

zz

City development occurred everywhere at the expense of ecology and environment.

zz

Despite its problems, the city has always been attractive to those seeking freedom and opportunity.

WORK, LIFE AND LEISURE

[ 25

KNOW THE TERMS
zzUrbanization

: The process of development of a city or a town.
: A theory that promotes the welfare of a person rather than the society.
zzMuseum : A building used for exhibition and storage of objects of the past or related with heritage or any interesting
unique objects is known as museum.
zzChawls : An Indian word refers to multistoried structure which is divided into a number of smaller one room
apartments.
zzBrahma : The God of creation according to the Hindu mythology.
zzAkharas : Traditional wrestling schools in India.
zzAsphyxiation : Suffocation due to lack of oxygen supply.
zzPhilanthropist : A person who works for social upliftment and charity, donating time and money for the purpose.
zzTenements : Cheap, usually unsafe one-room accommodation for migrant workers.
zzDepressed classes : Term used for ‘lower castes’ and ‘untouchables’ (Dalits).
zzPresidency cities : The capitals of the Bombay, Bengal and Madras Presidencies in British India.
zzGreen Belt : An area of open land with plants and trees for maintaining natural habitation and environment in
and around the city.
zzReclamation : Reclaiming of marshy or submerged areas for settlements.
zzTemperance Movement : A social reform movement led by middle-class people. It emerged in Britain and America
from the 19th century onwards.
zzIndividualism

KNOW THE DATES
zz1661

: British King Charles II was married to the princess of Portuguese.
: Land Reclamation began in Bombay.
zz1810 : Population of London was one million.
zz1819 : Bombay became the capital of Bombay Presidency, after the Anglo-Maratha war.
zz1847 and 1853 : The Smoke Abatement Acts of 1847 and 1853 were passed.
zz1852 : Louis Napoleon III (the nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte) declared himself the Emperor of France.
zz1854 : First Indian cotton textile mill was set up in Bombay.
zz1863 : The first section of underground railway in the world was opened linking Paddington and Farrington.
zz1865 : Bombay’s First Municipal Commissioner, Arthur Craswford, was appointed.
zz1870 : Compulsory Elementary Education Act was passed.
zz1880 : Population of London was 4 million.
zz1880 : The underground train service was expanded completely.
zz1887 : 13th November, 1887 a riot occurred in London, which is known as ‘the Bloody Sunday’.
zz1889 : Dock worker’s strike.
zz1898 : The city of Bombay Improvement Trust was established.
zz1901 : Census reports that 80% of Bombay’s inhabitants reside in one room houses.
zz1902 : The First Factory Act passed in England.
zz1913 : Dada Saheb Phalke made ‘Raja Harish chandra’, India’s first feature film.
zz1917 : Russian Revolution.
zz1918 : Bombay Rent Control Act was passed to keep rents reasonable.
zz1920 : The rice mills of Tollygunge began to burn rice husk instead of coal to reduce industrial smoke.
zz1925 : Bombay became India’s first film capital.
zz1784

KNOW THE LINKS
1. History of London city
		http://www.oldbaileyonline.org/static/population-history-of-london.jsp
2. History of Bombay city
		 http://www.mumbainet.com/template1.php?CID =15&SCID=5

26 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

FLOWCHART
z

.

z

z

In order to control the crime.

The widespread use of coal in homes and
industries in 19th cent. England raised
serious environmental problems.
Despite all these problems, city life ushered new routes
to social and economic mobility that the city offered
to the millions who made it their home.

Calcutta too had a long history
of air pollution.
In 1863, Calcutta became the
first Indian city to get smoke
nuisance legislation

[ 27

WORK, LIFE AND LEISURE

TOPIC-1

London in the 19th and 20th Century
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. The very first section of the underground railways
in the world was opened in which city ?
Ans. London.
1
Q. 2. A variety of steps were taken to clean up which
city ?
Ans. London.
1
Q. 3. When was Rent Control introduced in Britain ?
Ans. During the First World War.
1
Q. 4. Which movement demanded the ‘Right to Vote’
for adult males in Britain during the 18th Century ?
Ans. Chartism Movement.
1
Q. 5. Name any one film made by Dada Saheb Phalke.
Ans. Raja Harishchandra.
1
Q. 6. Name any two Presidencies in British India.
Ans. Bombay, Bengal and Madras.
1
Q. 7. When was ‘City of Bombay Improvement Trust’
established ?
Ans. 1898.
1
Q. 8. The very first section of the underground railways
in the world was opened between which two
places ?
Ans. Paddington and Farrington street in London.
1
Q. 9. Who was the architect and planner of London ?
Ans. Ebenezer Howard.
1
Q. 10. How did the East India Company get possession
of Bombay ?
Ans. The Portuguese government gifted it to Britain’s
king Charles-II on the occasion of his marriage. 1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Explain measures any three taken in order to
resolve the environmental problem in London.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans.		(i) Shopkeepers, homeowners and others
complained about the black for the that
descended on their towns causing bad tempers,
smoke-related illness and dirty clothes.
(ii) By the 1840s, a towns such as Derby, Leeds and
Manchester had laws to.
(iii) Control smoke in the city.
(iv) Smoke abatement Acts of 1847 and 1853 were
important measures taken in order to resolve the
problem, but the factory workers rarely followed
rules sincerely and the problem continued.
(Any three)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 2. Highlight any three changes that took place in
London between the two world wars.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans.		(i) Between the two world wars the responsibility
for housing the working classes was accepted by
the British state.
(ii) A million of single family cottages were built by
Local authorities.
(iii) The city had extended beyond the range where
people could walk to work.
(iv) New forms of mass transports were introduced.
		
(Any three) 1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015)
Q. 3. Explain any three historical processes that have
shaped London in decisive ways.
		
[School of Yavatmal, 2015]

1 mark each
3 marks each
Ans. 3 historical processes have shaped modern cities
namely :
(i) Rise of industrial capitalism,
(ii) The establishment of colonial rule over large parts
of the world.
(iii) Development of democratic ideals.
1× 3 = 3
Q. 4. Describe the life of children as depicted in
Andrew Mearn’s famous book “The Bitter Cry of
Outcast London.”
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. (i) Andrew Mearn’s showed why crime was more
profitable than labouring in small underpaid
factories.
(ii) A child of seven years old is easily known to make
10 shillings 6 pence a week from thieving.
(iii) Before he can gain as much as a young thief (a boy)
he must make 56 gross of matchboxes a week or
1,296 a day.
(iv) It was only after the passage of the Compulsory
Elementary Education Act in 1870 and the Factory
Acts beginning from 1902, that children were kept
out of industrial work.
(Any three)
1×3=3
Q. 5. How did air pollution become a nuisance for the
Londoners. What steps were taken to solve the
problem ?
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		State any three steps taken to clean up London.		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Or
		Describe various steps which were taken to clean
up London.[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, 2012 (38, 52),
		
2011 (5800, 13, 17, 28, 44), 2010 (B2)]

28 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. (i) Large quantities of refuge and waste products
polluted air and water.
(ii) Widespread use of coal in homes and industries in
19th century England raised serious problems.
(iii) In industrial cities such as Leeds, Bradford and
Manchester, hundreds of factory chimneys emitted
smoke, causing smoke-related illnesses, dirty
clothes and bad tempers.
(Any two)
(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

The steps taken to clean up London were :
Attempts were made to decongest localities, green
the open spaces, reduce pollution and landscape
the city.
Large blocks of apartments were built like those
in Berlin and in New York.
Rent control was introduced in Britain during the
First World War.
Demands were made for new ‘lungs’ for the
city and some attempts were made to bridge
the countryside through ideas as the Green Belt
around London.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Q. 6. Explain any three reasons for the increasing
concern for the London poor during the nineteenth
century.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. (i) The poor and filthy living conditions of one
room houses which posed a serious threat to public
health.
(ii) There was danger of fire hazards.
(iii) There was also a fear of social disorder or rebellion
by the workers especially after the Russian
Revolution in 1917.
1×3=3
Q. 7. How was the family life transformed in the
industrial city during the 18th century.
				

[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]

Ans. ‘Family’ as an institution underwent a social
change due to industrialization.
(i) Ties between members of household were loosened
and the institution of marriage tended to break
down among the working class families.
(ii) Women lost their jobs due to machines.
(iii) Rich upper class women lived easier lives as they
were served by domestic maids who made their
work easier.
1×3=3
Q. 8. What is meant by tenement ?
				

[Board 2013, Term 1, BHTK]

Ans. (i) A tenement is run-down and often over
crowded apartment house especially in a poor
section of large city.
(ii) In the 19th century, more and more people
began crowding into American cities including
thousands of newly arrived immigrants seeking
a better life. The population got doubled every
decade from 1800 to 1880 in New York city. This
led to the division of single family dwellings
into multiple living spaces to accommodate the
growing population.

(iii) These narrow low-rise apartment buildings also
known as tenements were too often cramped,
poorly built and lacked indoor plumbing and
proper ventillation.
(iv) A full two-third of the New York city population
was living in the tenement in 1900. (Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 9. Who are Philanthropists ? Explain any two steps
taken to control crime in London in the 1870s.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37)]
Ans. (i) The group of the people who work for social
upliftment and charity, donating time and money
for the purpose are called philanthropists.
(ii) Steps taken to control crime were :
		
(a) The authorities imposed high penalties for
crime.
		
(b) They offered work to the deserving poor.
		
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Q. 10. How did London become a powerful magnet for
the migrant population ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Ans. (i) London became a powerful magnet for
migrant population since it offered employment
opportunities.
(ii) London dockyard housed a large number of
porters, traders and people in the shipping line.
(iii) Major industries as clothing, footwear, metal,
engineering, etc., attracted labour from outside.
(iv) Being capital city also, it attracted people.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 11. How did the London Underground Railways
eventually become a huge success ? Explain.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Ans.		Underground London Railway became a huge
success due to following reasons :
(i) By 1880, the expanded train service carried 40
million passengers a year.
(ii) Population in the city became dispersed.
(iii) Planned suburbs and a good railway network
enabled large number of people to live outside
central London.
1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 12. What was the impact of industrialization and
urbanization on the family in Britain in the
nineteenth century ?
				 [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 21, 40), 2010 (C2)]
Ans. (i) Women gradually lost their industrial jobs and
were forced to work within households.
(ii) Through the activities of tailoring, washing or
match-box making they could increase their
income.
(iii) Large number of children were pushed into low
paid work.
1×3=3
Q. 13. Explain any three efforts made by women in
London to increase their income during eighteenth
century.
			 [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 20 32, 39), 2010 (A2)]

WORK, LIFE AND LEISURE

Ans. (i) In the late eighteenth century, large numbers of
women were employed in factories.
(ii) They were working as maid servants (domestic
servant).
(iii) A large number of women used their homes to
increase family income by taking in lodgers or
through such activities as tailoring, washing or
match-box making.
Q. 14. When was the London underground railway
started ? How did it help to solve the housing
problem ?
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A2)]

Ans. The very first section of the underground railway
in London started on 10th January, 1863.		
It helped to solve the housing problem in the
following ways :
(a) The population in the city became more dispersed.
(b) Better planned suburbs were developed.
(c) A good railway network enabled large number
of people to live outside Central London and
travelled to work.
(Any two) 1×3=3


Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Explain the statement “Certain groups of weavers
were in a better position than others to survive the
competition with mill industries“.
Ans. (a) Certain groups of weavers were in a better
position than others to survive the completion
with mill industries. Amongst weavers some
produced course cloth while others wove finer
varieties.
(b) The demand for the finer varieties bought by the
well-to-do was more stable. The rich could buy
these even when the poor starved.
(c) Famines didn’t affect the sale of Banarasi or
Baluchari saris.
(d) Moreover mills could not imitate specialized
weavers.
(e) Saris with woven borders or the famous lungis
and handkerchiefs of madras, could not be easily
displaced by mill production.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 2. Why did the population of London city expand
over the 19th century ? Explain.
				
(NCERT)
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, 6AP67LB]
[Board Term 1, 2012 (80)]
Or
		The city of London had a powerful migrant
population. Explain the reason.
				
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]
Or
		Why the population of London multiplied in the
late 19th and early 20th century ?
Ans. The population of London multiplied four fold
in the 70 years between 1810 and 1880 increasing
from 1 million to 4 millions.
(i) London was a powerful magnet for migrant
population , even though it did not have large
factories.
(ii) 19th Century London was a city of clerks and
shopkeepers of small traders and skilled artisans,
semi-skilled and sweated out workers of soldiers
and servants of casual workers, street sellers and
beggars.
(iii) There was a dockyard which provided
opportunities of livelihood.

[ 29

5 marks each
(iv) There were five major types of industries
employed large numbers; clothing and footwear,
wood and furniture, metals and engineering,
printing and stationery and precious products.
(v) During First World War the number of large
factories increased and a large number of people
joined the new created jobs.
1×5=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015, 2012)
Q. 3. Explain any five sources of entertainment which
came up in the 19th century in England to provide
leisure activities.[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Or
		 Describe five forms of entertainment that came up
in the 19th century England.		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33, 50), 2011 (5800, 22, 40, 44)]
Or
		 How did people of different classes organise their
new found leisure in England ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
				 [DDE-2015, Set-M][Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Ans. (i) For the wealthy Londoners, there was the
annual ‘London Season’ where elite groups could
enjoy several cultural events such as the opera
and theatre.
(ii) Working classes too had their own means of
entertainment. They used to meet in pubs and
enjoy a drink, exchange news and discuss political
events.
(iii) The establishment of libraries, museums and art
galleries provided entertainment to common
people.
(iv) Music halls and later cinema houses became a
source of mass entertainment.
(v) Industrial workers spent holidays by the sea shore
and enjoyed both sun and the wind which was a
great source of entertainment.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 4. Explain the social changes in London which led to
the need for the underground railways.		
		 [Board Term 1, NCT-2014, 2011 (5800, 15, 18)]
Or
		Why did underground railway soon become
a necessity in London? Mention any three
disadvantages of this system ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (553K), 2012 (35)]

30 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Or
		Explain the benefits of London Tube railway for
the population in the city.
				
[Board Term 1, DDE -2015, Set-E]
Or
		Why was the underground railway criticized in
London ? Explain the reasons.
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Or
		 “Even though the underground railway eventually
became a huge success, it was opposed by many
people initially.” Explain five valid reasons for
this opposition.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (70)]
Ans. (i) Attempts were made to decongest the city
of London and solve the housing crisis. So, the
British government built houses for working
classes. All these efforts expanded the city and
people found it difficult to walk to their work
places. This made the underground rail transport
essential for London.
Disadvantages : The development of the
underground railways was criticized because.
		
(a) The underground railways were considered a
menace to health due to the lack of oxygen
created in the compartments by smoking
pipes, fumes of gas lamps and coal dust.
		
(b) A large number of houses for poor were
displaced for its construction.
		
(c) It added to the mess and unhealthy
environment of the city.
5
		
(d) People were afraid to travel underground.
		
(e) Many felt that ‘iron monsters’ added to the
mass and unhealthiness of the city.
		
(f) To make approximately two miles of railways,
900 houses had to be destroyed.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015, 2013, 2012)
Q. 5. Ties between members of households loosened in
Britain in the era of industrialization. Explain the
statement.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		“The function and shape of the family were
completely transformed by life in the industrial
city”. Support the statement with examples.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]
Ans. In the 18th century, the family had been a unit
of production and consumption as well as of
political decision-making. There was a big change
in the newer pattern.
(i) Ties between members of household loosened.
(ii) The institution of marriage among the working
class tended to break down.
(iii) Women of the upper and middle classes in
Britain, faced increasingly higher level of isolation
although their lives were made easier by maids.

(iv) Women who worked for wages had some control
over their lives particularly among the lower
social classes.
(v) By the 20th century, the urban family had been
transformed again partly by experience of the
war time and partly work done by the comen
who were employed in large numbers. 1×5=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 6. Explain any five changes that took place in the
family life in the 18th century, which promoted
individualism in the city life.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (60)]
Or
		Explain any five social changes that took place in
the family life in the 18th century in London.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]
Or
		
Explain the social changes, ‘Family’ as an
institution underwent in Britain in the era of
industrialization.
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]
Ans. ‘Family’ as an institution underwent a social
change due to industralization.
(i) The class Kant joint family in the village scenario
disappeared in the town and cities. The bond
between family members loosened.
(ii) Women lost their jobs to machines.
(iii) Rich upper class women lived easier lives as they
were served by domestic maids who made their
work easier.
(iv) Forced to live at home in urban areas, leading
them to face isolation at home.
(v) Public places were dominated by males and
females were confined to the home.
(vi) Women gradually began to participate in political
movements to ask for their rights.
(vii) Families were small or nuclear.
(Any five)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 7. How did marginal groups threaten the city of
London ? What was the root cause of this problem ?
How did the authorities in London try to solve
this problem ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45, 48)]
Ans. (i) The Police were worried about the law and
order and industrialists wanted an orderly work
force. There were professional criminals like
cheats, tricksters, pick pockets and petty thieves
too in the marginal groups.
(ii) Most of the people in the marginal groups were
very poor who lived by selling lead stolen from
roofs, food from shops, lumps of coal and cloth
drying from hedges.
(iii) In order to discipline them the authorities counted
the number of criminals, watched their activities
and investigated their lives. High penalties were
imposed and deserving poor people were offered
work. (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2+1+2=5

[ 31

WORK, LIFE AND LEISURE

Q. 8. Why did the concept of ‘Garden City’ come up in
London ? Describe the different efforts initiated to
beautify London.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (47)]
Or
		What steps were taken to clean London in the
early and mid 20th century ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2010 (A1)]
Ans. (i) The widespread use of coal in homes and
industries in 19th century England raised serious
problems. Shopkeepers, home owners and others
complained about the black fog, grey skies and
black vegetation. All these factors caused bad
temper, smoke related illness and dirty clothes.
Congestion in the city also led to a yearning for the
clean air.
(ii) As a result, the demand for new ‘lungs’ for the
city was made. Large blocks of apartments were
built and rent control was introduced to ease the
housing problem.
(iii) ‘Garden City’ of New Earswick was designed with
common garden spaces and landscaping.
(iv) Between the two world wars (1919-39), the
responsibility for housing for the working classes
was accepted by the British state and million
houses, most of which were single family cottages,
were built by local authorities.
(v) The British government built single family
cottages for the working classes and the London
underground work was started to enable the
workers to reach their work places.
1×5=5
Q. 9. How did crime grow in London in 1870s ? How
were authorities able to control them ? Explain.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (68)]

Ans. Growth of Crime in London :
(i) In London there were 20,000 criminals in 1870s.
(ii) In the mid 19th century, Henry Mathew wrote
several articles on the London labour and those
who made their living from crime.
(iii) Many criminals were poor, who lived by stealing
lead from roofs, food from shops, coal and also
clothes.
Control of Crime :
(i) The police were worried about the law and order
situation.
So population of criminals were counted, their
activities were watched and their ways of life
were investigated.
(ii) In an attempt to discipline the criminals,
authorities imposed high penalties for crime
and offered work to those who were considered
“deserving poor”.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3+2=5
Q. 10. When and where was the first section of the
underground Railway opened in the world ?
Explain any three difficulties of travelling in that
underground Railway. [Board Term 1, 2012 (37)]
Ans. 10th January, 1863 in Paddington and Farrington
Street in London.
		Difficulties :
(i) The compartments were filled with smoke.
(ii) Atmosphere was a mixture of sulphur, coal dust
and foul fumes.
(iii) Suffocation led to Asphyxiation.
2+3=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Detailed Answer : Refer Ans 4 ‘Long Answer Type’ :
Points (a), (c), (d) and (e).

TOPIC-2

Bombay in the 19th and 20th Century
Very Short Answer Type Questions

Q. 1.
Name any one characteristics of Bombay city.
Ans.
It is a centre of trade and industry.
1
Q. 2.
Which city had a long history of air pollution ?
Ans.
Calcutta (Kolkata).
1
Q. 3.
Identify an architect and planner who developed
the principle of the Garden City.
Ans.
Ebenezer Howard.
1
Q. 4.
When was the very first section of the underground
railway in the world opened ?
Ans.
10 January, 1863.
1
Q. 5.
When did Bombay become the capital of Bombay
Presidency ?
Ans.
1819.
1
Q. 6.
Who wrote the book ‘The Bitter Cry of Outcaste
London’ in the 1880s ?
Ans.
Andrew Mearns.
1

1 mark each

Q. 7. Which industry in London did not employ large
number of people in the 19th century ?
Ans. Railway manufacturing.
1
Q. 8. Which European power was the first to establish
its control over Bombay ?
Ans. Portuguese.
1
Q. 9. Which city of India is called ‘Mayapuri’ or the
‘city of dreams’ ?
Ans. Bombay.
1
Q. 10. Name one factor which changed the form of
urbanisation in the modern world.
Ans. Industrialization.
1
Q. 11. Who wrote several volumes on the London labour
in the mid of the 19th century ?
Ans. Henry Mayhew.

1

32 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 12. Name the author of the novel ‘DEBGANER
MARTYE AAGAMAN’ (The Gods Visit Earth).
Ans. Durgacharan Ray.
1

Q. 13. Name any one Presidential city during colonial
India.
Ans. Bombay.
1


Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. How did farming methods change due to
industrialization ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB ]
Ans.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Methods change due to industrialisation :
Steel plough used in place of wooden plough.
Harrow in place of wooden weeder.
Mechanical drill for seed sowing, reaping and
threshing machines.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1×3=3
Q. 2. How did Bombay emerge as an important colonial
city ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (64, 77)]
Or
		How did Bombay come under the British rule ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-XOKG25B]
Ans.Reasons :
(i) Bombay was the principal port of the East India
Company.
(ii) It was an important centre for cotton textiles from
Gujarat.
(iii) It became an important administrative centre of
western India.
(iv) It emerged as a major industrial centre in the 19th
century.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 3. How did the development or expansion of
Bombay (Mumbai) differ from London ? State any
three points of difference between the two.
[Board Term 1, 2015, 2014 (X30T4XE),
(WQ7FXWC), 2012(33)]
[DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans.(i) Bombay was an over-crowded city, where a
person had only 9.5 sq. yards of space whereas it
was around 155 sq. yards per person in London.
(ii) Bombay did not grow according to a plan whereas
London grew according to plan.
(iii) London had an average density of 8 persons per
house whereas the density in Bombay was as
high as 20 persons.
1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015, 2012)
Q. 4. Describe any three features of ‘Chawls’ in
Bombay.
[DDE-2015, Set-M]
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		
“The Chawls of Bombay were a small
cosmopolitan community in themselves.” Explain
the statement.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans. (i) Chawls were resided by poor.
(ii) Open space in the center of the chawls was used
for various activities.
(iii) Chawls were headed by a headman like village
headman.


3 marks each
(iv) People in chawls lived like an integrated
family.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 5. Mention the three presidency cities of Indian ?
Why were they referred to as ‘multifunctionality’
cities ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, School of Yavatmal]
Ans. The capitals of the Bombay, Bengal and Madras
Presidencies in British India. These were
multifunctional cities’ because they had major
ports, warehouses, homes and offices, army camps,
as well as educational institutions, museums and
libraries.
1½ + 1½
Q. 6. When and why was the Rent Act passed in
Bombay during the British days ? What was its
outcome ?
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Or
		When was the Rent Act passed in Bombay ? What
was its aim ? What was the impact ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (80)]
Ans.(i) The Rent Act was passed in Bombay in 1918.
(ii) It aimed at controlling rent and keeping them
within reasonable limit.
(iii) The Act had a reserve impact of producing a
severe housing crisis, since the landlords withheld
renting out houses from the market.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 7. “Cities developed at the cost of ecology and
environment.” Explain with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		Assess the impact of development of cities on
ecology and the environment.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (70), 2011 (5800, 19 24, 25,
		
36, 42) 2010 (B1)]
Ans. Effects of development of cities on ecology and
environment :
(i) Large quantities of refuge and waste products
polluted the air and water, while excessive noise
became a feature of urban life.
(ii) In industrial cities, hundreds of factory chimneys
released black smoke into the skies.
(iii) Shopkeepers, homeowners and others complained
about the black fog that descended in their towns
causing, smoke-related illnesses and dirty cloths.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 8. State any three causes of our pollution in Calcutta
in the 19th century.
[Board Term 1, 2013, 553K]
Ans.(i) Pollution was due to large number of people
being dependent on dung and wood as fuel.
(ii) Industries and other establishment used steam
engines that run on coal and caused air pollution.

[ 33

WORK, LIFE AND LEISURE

(iii) Due to marshy land, the resulting fog combined
with smoke to generate thick smog.
(iv) Calcutta had a history of air pollution. Its
inhabitants inhailed grey smoke.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 9. State any three characteristics of the ancient
cities.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36), 2010 (A1)]
Ans. (i) Ancient towns and cities appeared along river
valleys such as Ur, Nippur and Mohenjodaro.
(ii) They were large in scale than other human
settlements, performances and exchange of news
related to jobs, strikes, riots etc.
(iii) These cities were centres of political power,
administrative network, trade and industry,
religious institutions and intellectual activities.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 10. Why did more and more people migrate to
Bombay by the early 20th century ? Explain three
reasons.
[Board Term 1, 2012, (35, 53)]

Ans. (i) The growth of trade in cotton and opium
attracted a large number of traders, bankers and
artisans to Bombay.
(ii) A large number of people migrated to Bombay
from Ratnagiri to work in the textile mills.
(iii) Bombay was the junction head of two major
railways and dominated the maritime trade.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 11. Throw light on some of the land reclamation
projects of Bombay.
[Board Term 1, 2010 (B1)]
Ans. Land reclamation projects of Bombay are :
(i) Building of great sea wall prevented flooding of
low-lying areas of Bombay.
(ii) Levelling of hills around Bombay.
(iii) Dry dock was built between 1914 and 1918 and
the excavated earth was used to create the Ballard
Estate.
1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What led to the major expansion of Bombay’s
population in the mid-nineteenth century ?
		
(NCERT) [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 41)]
Or
		‘A large number of migrants were attracted to
Bombay in the 20th century.’ Explain the statement.
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. (i) Bombay became the capital city of the Bombay
presidency in 1819, hence more people began to
settle in Bombay.
(ii) Growth of trade in cotton and opium led large
communities of traders, bankers, artisans and
shopkeepers came to settle in Bombay.
(iii) In 1854, cotton mills were established in Bombay.
Most of the workers came from outside.
(iv) Large number of people came to work at the seaport
and the railways which encouraged migration.
(v) Famines in dry regions brought more people to
Bombay. Bombay attracted many people to work
in films too.
5
Q. 2. Describe the features of the big modern city of
Calcutta (Kolkata) as viewed by the Gods in the
novel written by Durgacharan Roy.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, School of Yavatmal, 2015]
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. In ‘Debganer Martye Agaman’ Brahma visits the
city of Calcutta along with other Gods. They saw
distraction by the train, large ships in the Ganga,
factories, bridges, monuments, shops and the
variety of gods sold in shops. However, they were
disturbed to see cheats and thieves, poverty, poor
housing, confusion of caste, religious and gender
identities in the city. Brahma himself was trucked
into buying a cheap pair of glasses. Durgacharan
Ray describes the contrasting images and
experience like wealth and poverty, splendour and
diet, opportunities and disappointments that the
cities offered.
5

5 marks each
Q. 3. Describe the social life of people in (Bombay). 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. (i) The city of Bombay was over crowded. As such,
there was an interdependence among people.
(ii) The homes were small, so streets and
neighbourhood were used for a variety of activities
and social functions.
(iii) The rich people lived in spacious bungalows.
(iv) The working people lived in the thickly-populated
Chawls of Bombay.
(v) Shortage of water was a common phenomenon.
(vi) Lower caste people found it difficult to find
housing.
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 4. Why has city life always attracted those seeking
freedom and opportunity ? Explain.
				
[Board 2013, Term 1, BHTK]
Ans. (i) The city life symbolized freedom from the
collective social values which people were
compelled to follow in their villages.
(ii) There were numerous caste and community rules
in the rural set-up which based when people
moved to cities.
(iii) People became more free and they carried new
ways of living.
(iv) The public transport system and multistoreyed
housing loosened traditional regulations and
people learned to live in multiethnic and
multicultural environment brought from different
places by migrants to the city.
(v) The city symbolized self made people who come
here to pursue their dreams.
(vi) City culture bought a wave of individualism and
were supposed to be quite organised than the
rural areas, so people who migrated found it
attractive.
(Any five) 1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)

34 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 5. What were ‘Chawls’ ? Describe the living
conditions in chawls in Bombay.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36)]
Or
		 Describe the life of people who lived in the chawls
of Bombay (Mumbai). [Board Term 1, 2012 (49)]
Ans. Chawls were the multi-storeyed structures built
and owned by private landlord such as merchants,
bankers and building contractors. Each Chawl is
divided into smaller one - room tenements.
(i) No private toilets. Many families could reside at a
time in a tenement.
(ii) People used to keep windows closed because of
the close proximity to filthy putter, buffalo stables
etc.
(iii) Due to water scarce the people quarrelled
every morning for a turn at the tap. Streets and
Neighbourhoods areas were used for activities as
cooking, washing, sleeping.
(iv) Liquor shops and Akharas in empty sports. Streets
were used for leisure activities.
(v) Chawls were also a place for exchanging news
about strikes, riots, demonstrations etc. 1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 6. Explain any four causes of air pollution in Calcutta
in 19th century and early 20th century. Which body
controlled industrial pollution in Bengal ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]
Or
		Calcutta (Kolkata) had a long history of ‘air
pollution’. Explain any five reasons for it.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Ans.(i) Causes :
		
(a) Huge population depended on dung and
wood as fuel in their daily life.
		
(b) The industries and establishments that used
steam engines were run on coal.
		
(c) In 1855, the introduction of Railway brought
coal from Raniganj which had high content of
ash. It also polluted the air.
		
(d) The fog in the city combined with smoke to
create thick smog.
		
(e) Due to marshy land, the resulting fog
combined with smoke to generate thick smog.
(ii) Bengal Smoke Nuisance Commission controlled
industrial pollution in Bengal.
4+1=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 7. Why were reclamation projects undertaken in
Bombay ? Explain any two such projects.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (53)]
Or
		
Why was the land reclamation in Bombay
necessary ? Mention any two land reclamation
projects taken up in Bombay.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 12, 20, 27, 38)]
Ans. The Reclamation in Bombay was necessary
because :
(i) When the islands of Bombay passed into British
hands, the East India Company shifted its base
from Surat to Bombay.

Thus, Bombay became a major outlet for exports
and it also became an important administration
centre in Western India and by the end of the 19th
century a major industrial centre.
(ii) With the growth of trade in cotton and opium
large communities of trades and banks as well
as artisans and shopkeepers came to settle in
Bombay.
(iii) Bombay dominated the maritime trade of India
till well into the twentieth century.
(iv) The railways encouraged an even higher scale
of migration into the city. For instance, famine
in dry region of Kutch drove large numbers of
people into Bombay in 1888-89.
(Any three)
		Land Reclamation Projects :
(i) Back Bay Reclamation : In 1864, the Back Bay
Reclamation Company won the right to reclaim
the western foreshore from the tip of Malabar hill
to the end of Colaba.
(ii) Bombay Port Trust : A successful Reclamation
project was undertaken by the Bombay Port
Trust, which built a dry between 1914 and 1918
used the excavated earth to create the 22 acre
Ballard Estate. Subsequently the famous Marine
Drive of Bombay was developed.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3+2=5
Q. 8. What do you mean by “Land Reclamation”?
Explain the history of land reclamation in
Mumbai.
				 [Board Term 1, 2012 (39), 2011 (5800, 23, 45)]
Ans. Reclamation means reclaiming of marshy or
submerged areas for settlement or other use.
(i) William Hornby approved the building of great
sea wall.
(ii) Several plans by both government and private
companies.
(iii) In 1864 the Back Bay Reclamation Company won
the right to reclaim foreshore from Malabar Hill to
Calaba.
(iv) Bombay Port Trust created 22 acre Ballard
Eastate. (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5
Q. 9. “Bombay is a city of slums and star bungalows —a
blend of dream and reality.” Justify the statement
giving any five suitable arguments.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Ans. (i) Bombay films have contributed in a big way to
produce an image of the city as a blend of dream
and reality.
(ii) Rich industrialists and film producers owned
spacious bungalows.
(iii) Bombay offered employment to both skilled and
unskilled workers.
(iv) With the rapid and unplanned expansion of the
city, the pressure on Bombay’s housing problem
increased.
(v) Refuge and waste products of large factories led to
pollution.
5



4

CHAPTER

PRINT CULTURE
AND THE
MODERN WORLD

(i) The history of print in Europe.
(ii) The growth of press in 19th century India.
(iii) Relationship between print culture, public debate and politics.

QUICK REVIEW
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

The earliest kind of print technology was developed in
China, Japan and Korea.
TOPIC - 1
The early system of printing was hand printing.
Print Culture and the Modern
World .... P. 39
Books in China were printed by rubbing paper against the
inked surface of wooden blocks.
TOPIC - 2
China was the major producer of printed materials.
The Growth of Press in 19th Century
Shanghai was the hub of the new print culture.
India .... P. 44
The oldest Japanese book printed in A.D. 868, is the Buddhist
‘Diamond Sutra.’
In medieval Japan, poets and prose writers were regularly
published and books were cheap and abundant.
In the late 18th century, at Edo, illustrated collections of paintings depicted an elite urban culture.
For centuries, silk and spices from China flowed into Europe through the silk route.
In the 11th century, Chinese paper reached Europe via the silk route.
At Strasbourg, Germany, Johann Gutenberg developed the first known printing press in the 1430s.
The first book printed by Gutenberg was the Bible.
One hundred eighty copies of this book were printed in three years.
Printed books at first closely resembled the written manuscripts in appearance and layout.
Luxury editions were still written by hand on a very expensive ‘Vellum’ meant for aristocratic circles.
The print revolution transformed the lives of people.
In 1517, the religious reformer Martin Luther wrote ‘Ninety Five Theses’ criticising the Catholic Church.
Printing helped to spread the new ideas of Reformation.
The Roman Church imposed severe controls over publishers and booksellers.
In England, penny chap books were carried, by petty peddlers known as chapmen sold for a penny.
In France, were the ‘Biliotheque Bleue’, which were low-priced small books.
The periodical press, newspapers and journals carried information about wars and trade, as well as news
of development in other places.
The ideas and writings of the scientists like Isaac Newton, Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Jean Jacques
Rousseau were printed and read.
The French Revolution occurred as print helped the spread of ideas.
Primary education became compulsory from the late 19th century, Children became an important category
of readers.
A children’s press, devoted to literature for children was set up in France in 1857.
Penny magazines were specially meant for women.
The best known novelists were Jane Austen, the Bronte Sisters, George Eliot.
In the 19th century, libraries in England became instruments for educating the factory workers, artisans
and lower middle-class people.

36 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

zzSelf-educated

working class people wrote political tracts and autobiographies.
the late 18th century, the press came to be made out of metal.
zzRichard M. Hoe of New York made the power driven cylindrical press, which was capable of printing 8,000 sheets
per hour. This press was used for printing newspapers.
zzIn the late 19th century, the offset press was developed.
zzIn 1930s, publishers brought out cheap paperback editions.
zzIndia had a very rich and old tradition of hand written manuscripts in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian as well as in various
vernacular languages.
zzIn India, manuscripts were copied on palm leaves and on hand made paper.
zzIn 1710, Dutch missionaries had printed 32 Tamil texts.
zzFrom 1780, James Augustus Hickey began to edit the ‘Bengal Gazette’, a weekly magazine.
zzBy the close of the 18th century, printing of many newspapers and journals started.
zzIn the early 19th century, there were intense debates around existing religious issues.
zzSome groups wanted reforms, while others were against them.
zzThis was a time of intense controversies between social and religious reforms.
zzThe reformers were focussed on the Hindu orthodoxy over matters like widow immolation, monotheism,
Brahmanical priesthood and idolatry.
zzMany newspapers such as “Sambad Kaumudi” in 1821 (by Ram Mohan Roy) “Samachar Chandrika” (Hindu
Orthodoxy), “Jam-i-Jahan Nama” and “Shamsul Akbar” from 1822 (Persian newspaper) focussed on this matter.
zzIn North India, the ‘Ulama’ used lithographic presses, published Persian and Urdu translation of holy scriptures,
and printed religious newspapers and tracts to spread their religion.
zzIn 1867, Deoband seminary was founded which published thousands of ‘Fatwas’ telling the code of conduct of
Muslims and explaining the meanings of doctrines.
zzPrint encouraged the reading of religious texts, especially in the vernacular languages.
zzThe first printed edition of the Ramcharitmanas came out from Calcutta in 1810.
zzNaval Kishore Press at Lucknow and the Shri Venkateshwar Press in Bombay published numerous religious texts
in vernaculars.
zzAt the end of the 19th century, a new visual culture was started.
zzPainters like Raja Ravi Verma produced images for mass circulation.
zzCheap prints and calenders were easily available in the market.
zzBy the 1870’s, caricatures and cartoons were being published in journals and newspapers.
zzIn 1860, few Bengali women like Kailashbashini Debi wrote books highlighting the experiences of women.
zzHindi printing began from the 1870s.
zzIn Punjab, folk literature was printed from the early 20th century.
zzIn Bengal, the Battala was devoted to the printings of popular books, peddlers took the Battala publications to
homes, enabling women to read in leisure time.
zzPublic libraries were set up in the early 20th century.
zzLocal protest movements created a lot of popular journals.
zzAfter the revolt of 1857, the attitude to freedom of the press changed.
zzIn 1878, the Vernacular Press Act was passed.
zzIn 1907, Bal Gangadhar Tilak wrote with great sympathy about Punjab revolution in his “Kesari”. This led to his
imprisonment in 1908.
zzBy

KNOW THE TERMS
zzCalligraphy

: The art of beautiful and stylish writing.
: The person who composes the text for printing.
zzDespotism : A system of governance in which absolute power is exercised by an individual, unregulated by legal
and constitutional checks.
zzAlmanac : An annual publication giving astronomical data, information about the movements of the sun and
moon, timing of full tides and eclipses, and much else that was of importance in the everyday life of people.
zzDenominations : Sub-groups with a religion.
zzAnthology : A collection of poems, stories etc. that have been written by different people and published together
in a book.
zzGalley : Metal frame in which types are laid and the text composed.
zzChapbooks : Pocket size books that were popular in the 16th century print revolution.
zzManuscript : Book or document written by hand. It can also be termed as author’s original copy - handwritten or
typed but not printed.
zzCompositor

PRINT CULTURE AND THE MODERN WORLD

[ 37

zzBallad

: A historical account or folk tale in verse, usually sung or recited.
: Story of one’s own life written by the author himself or herself.
zzInquisition : A former Roman Catholic court for identifying and punishing heretics.
zzHeretical : Beliefs which do not follow the accepted teachings of the Church.
zzSatiety : The state of being fulfilled much beyond the point of satisfaction.
zzFatwa : A legal pronouncement of Islamic law usually given by a mufti (legal scholar) to clarify issues on which the
law is uncertain.
zzSeditions : Action, speech or writing that oppose the government.
zzTaverns : Places where people gathered to drink alcohol to be served food and to meet friends and exchange news.
zzProtestant Reformation : A movement to reform the Catholic Church.
zzLithography : The process of printing from a smooth surface, viz., a metal plate, that has been specially prepared
so that ink only sticks to the design to be printed.
zzRevolution : Cause to change fundamentally.
zzUlama : Legal scholars of Islam and the Sharia (a body of Islamic law).
zzVellum : A parchment made from the skin of animals.
zzNew Testament : The second part of the Bible, that describes the life and the teachings of Jesus Christ.
zzScribes : Skilled hand writers of manuscripts.
zzPlaten : In letterpress printing, platen is a board which is pressed onto the back of the paper to get the impression
from the type. At one time it used to be a wooden board, later it was made of steel.
zzParchment : Skin of animals like goat or sheep specially prepared for the purpose of writing, painting, etc.
zzAutobiography

KNOW THE DATES
zz594

: Books in China were printed by rubbing paper against the inked surface of woodblocks.
: Hand printing technology was introduced in Japan.
zz868 : The first Japanese book ‘The Diamond Sutra’ was printed.
zz11th century : Paper reached Europe from China.
zz1295 : Marco Polo brought the knowledge of producing books with woodblocks to Europe from China.
zz1448 : Johann Gutenberg invented the printing press.
zz1450-1550 : Printing presses set up in most countries of Europe.
zz1517 : Religious reformer Martin Luther printed ‘Ninety Five Theses’, criticizing many of the practices and rituals
of the Romann Catholic Church, starting the ‘Protestant Reformation’.
zz1558 : The Roman Church began maintaining an index of prohibited books.
zz1713 : First Malyalam book was published in Cochin by the Catholic priests.
zz1780 : James Augustus Hickey began to edit the Bengal Gazette. It was a weekly magazine.
zz1791 : James Lackington wrote in his diary about the tremendous increase in the sale of books.
zz1810 : The first printing edition of the Ramcharitmanas of Tulsidas came out from Calcutta.
zz1812 : Fairy Tales were printed by the Grimm brothers.
zz1821 : Raja Rammohan Roy published the Sambad Kaumudi.
zz1822 : Two Persian newspapers ‘Jam-i-Jahan Nama’ and ‘Shamsul Akbar’ were published.
zz1843 : Steam powered rotary printing press, suitable for printing newspapers was invented by Richard Hoe.
zz1878 : The Vernacular Press Act was passed in India.
zz1880s : Tarabai Shinde and Pandita Ramabai wrote about the miserable lives of upper-caste Hindu women,
especially widows.
zz1926 : Begum Rokeya Sakhawat Hossein, an educationist and literary figure, strongly condemned men for
withholding education from women.
zz768-770

KNOW THE LINKS
1. History of Printing and Printing Processes.
		 (a) http://inventors.about.com
		 (b) http://www.bpsnet.org.uk
2. The Print Media
		http://download.nos.org

38 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

FLOWCHART
The earliest kind of technology was a system of hand-printing. It was developed in China, Japan and Korea.

Shanghai became the hub of the new print culture.

In the 11th century, Chinese paper reached Europe via the silk route.

Johann Gutenberg invented the olive printing press which provided the model for the printing press.

With the printing press, a new reading public emerged in the world.

Through the 17th & 18th centuries, literacy rates went up in various parts of Europe.

In England, penny chap books were carried, by petty peddlers known as chapmen sold for a penny.

In France, were the 'Biliotheque Blue', which were low priced small books printed on poor quality paper.

The discoveries of Isaac Newton and the writings of thinkers such as Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Jean
Jacques Rousseau were widely printed and read.

Print created a new culture of dialogue and debate.

Through the 19th century, there were a series of further innovations in printing technology.

India had a very rich and old tradition of handwritten manuscripts in different languages.

Manuscripts were copied on palm leaves or on handmade paper.

The first printing press came to Goa (India) with Portuguese missionaries in the mid 16th century.

After the Revolt of 1857, the attitude to freedom of the press changed. Eraged Englishmen demanded a
clamp down on the 'native' press.

In 1878, the Vernacular Press Act was passed , modelled on the Irish Press Laws.

This act provided the government with extensive right to censor report and editorials.

Public libraries were set up from the early 20th century, expanding the access to books.

Social reformers like Jyotiba Phule wrote about the injustices of caste system in his book Gulamgiri.

[ 39

PRINT CULTURE AND THE MODERN WORLD

TOPIC-1

Print Culture and the Modern World
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Mention any one feature of the oldest japanese
book.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans.		Oldest Japanese book contained six sheets of text
and woodcut illustrations.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1
Q. 2. How were Biliotheque bleue different from penny
chap books ? [Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans.		Both were low priced books printed on poor
quality paper but the Biliotheque Bleue were
bounded in cheap blue covers.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1
Q. 3. Name the first book printed by Johann Gutenberg.
				
[DDE-2015, Set-E)]
Ans. Bible.
Q. 4. Give the ancient name of Tokyo.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-X0K2SB]
Ans. Edo.
1
Q. 5. How did Louise Sebestian Mercier interpret the
printing press ?
[School of Yavatmal, 2015]
Ans. He said that ‘printing press is the most powerful
engine of progress and public opinion is the force
that will sweep despotism away.
1
Q. 6. Who developed the first printing press ?
			
[Board Term 1, 2014, (WQ7FXWC), (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. Johann Gutenberg.
1
Q. 7. Which method of hand-printing was developed in
China ?
[Board Term 1, 2014, (X30T4XE)]
Ans. Woodblock printing.
1
Q. 8. Why were cheap paperback editions of books
print by the end of eighteenth century ?
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. So that poor people could buy them.
1
Q. 9. Who introduced hand-printing technology in
Japan ?
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. Buddhist missionaries from China.
1
Q. 10. What is Calligraphy ? [Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. The art of beautiful and stylish writing.
1



1 mark each

Q. 11. By whom was the Ninety-five Theses written in
1517 ?
Ans. Martin Luther.
1
Q. 12. What do we call the wooden or metal frames in
which types are laid and the text is imposed for
printing ?
Ans. Galley.
1
Q. 13. Which is the oldest printed Japanese book ?
[DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. Diamond Sutra.
1
Q. 14. “Printing is the ultimate gift of God and the
greatest one”. Who spoke these words ?
Ans. Martin Luther.
1
Q. 15. Name the first book which was printed in Europe.
Ans. The Bible.
1
Q. 16. Who was Martin Luther ?
Ans. Religious reformer of Germany.
1
Q. 17. What was the basic objective of spelling penny
chapbook in England ?
Ans. So that the poor people can purchase them.
1
Q. 18. What were the books carried by petty pedlars and
sold for a penny were known in England ?
Ans. Chapbooks.
1
Q. 19. On which laws the Vernacular Press Act of 1878
was modelled ?
Ans. Irish Press Laws.
1
Q. 20. What was the cheap book known in France ?
Ans. Biliotheque Bleue.
1
Q. 21. Which religious reformer criticised the practices
of the Roman Catholic Church ?
Ans. Martin Luther.
1
Q. 22. Who was the enlightment thinker whose writings
are said to have created conditions for a revolution
in France ?
Ans. Rousseau.
1
Q. 23. Who agreed to revise Press Laws in 1835 ?
Ans. Governor General Bentinck.
1
Q. 24. In which country was the earliest kind of print
technology developed ?
Ans. China.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why did the Roman Catholic Church begin to
keep an Index of prohibited books from the mid
16th century ?
[Board Term 1, 2015, 6AP67LB]
			
[Board 2013 (5533K), 2012 Term 1(47)]
3 marks each
Ans.		(i) Printed religious literature stimulated a
variety of interpretations of faith, even among
the little educated working class in the early 16th
century.

40 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(ii) Menocchio, an Italian miller, reinterpreted the
Bible in a way that enraged the Roman Catholic
Church.
(iii) Such instances worried the Church about people
reading the various interpretations of the religion
and questioning the Church.
(iv) Hence, it imposed severe controls over publishers
and booksellers and began maintaining an index
of prohibited books.
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1
Q. 2. In which three way did the printed books at first
closely resembled the written manuscripts ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans.		(i) Appearance and layout resembled the written
manuscripts.
(ii) Metal letters imitated the ornamented hand
written styles.
(iii) Borders were illuminated.
(iv) Space for decoration was kept blank. (Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 3. Who was Manocchio ? Mention any two
contributions of him in the field of print culture
in the sixteenth century.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans.		(i) In the sixteenth century, Menocchio, a miller in
Italy, began to read books that were available in
his locality.
(ii) He reinterpreted the message of the Bible and
formulated a view of God and Creation that
enraged the Roman Catholic Church.
(iii) When the Roman Church began its inquisition to
repress heretical ideas, Menocchio was hauled up
twice and ultimately executed.
(iv) The Roman Church, troubled by such effects
of popular readings and questioning of faith,
imposed server controls over publishers and
booksellers and began to maintain an Index of
Prohibited Books from 1558.
(Any three)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1
Q. 4. Explain the reasons favouring shift from hand
printing to mechanical printing in China.
[DDE-2015, Set E]
			 [Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (WQ7FXWC)]
Or
		Explain the different stages of development of
printing technology in China.
				
[Board Term-1 2012, SS2-61]
Ans. (i) From 594 A.D. the books were printed in China
by rubbing paper against the inked surface of
woodblocks.
(ii) The imperial court got many textbooks printed
for the civil services examination and remained
the targets user of printed books in China.
(iii) By the 17th century urban culture developed
in China and it added merchants, wives of rich
men, scholars and officials who not only started
reading printed books but also began to write
their autobiographies.
(iv) In the late 19th century the western powers
established mechanical printing press in Shanghai
and shifted to mechanical printing.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3

Detailed Answer :
The reasons favouring shift from hand printing to
mechanical printing in China are :
(i) Textbooks of Civil Service Examination were
printed in vast numbers under the sponsorship of
the imperial state. From the sixteenth century, the
number of examination candidates went up and
that increased the volume of print.
(ii) By the seventeenth century, print was no longer
used just by scholar officials. Merchants used
print in their everyday life, as they collected trade
information.
(iii) Reading increasingly became a leisure activity.
The new readership preferred fictional narratives,
poetry, autobiographies, anthologies of literary
masterpieces, and romantic plays.
(iv) Rich woman began to read, and many woman
began publishing their poetry and plays. Wives
of scholar-officials published their works and
courtesans wrote about their lives. The new reading
culture was accompanied by a new technology.
Western printing techniques and mechanical
presses were imported in China and Shanghai
became the new hub of the new print culture.
		
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 5. ‘With the printing press a new public emerged in
Europe’. Justify the statement.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-XOKG25B]
Ans. Refer to Answer of Long Question No. 6
Q. 6. What led the colonial government to pass the
Vernacular Press Act in 1878 ? How did it affect
the Vernacular newspapers ?
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		Why was Vernacular Press Act passed ? Explain
about this Act.
[Board Term 1, 2015, XOKG25B]
Ans. (i) The Vernacular Press Act was passed because
the Vernacular newspapers were assertively
nationalist. They openly criticized and debated the
government policies.
(ii) The Vernacular Press Act of 1878 was passed which
empowered the government to censor reports and
editorials.
(iii) Government kept a regular tract of Vernacular
newspapers. If a report was judged seditious,
the newspaper was warned and if warning was
ignored appropriate actions were taken.
1×3=3
Q. 7. What is meant by the print revolution ? Explain its
significance.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG),
		
(WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. With the invention of printing press, the printing
of books started at a large scale. It was called the
Print Revolution.
		Significance :
(i) With the printing press, a new reading public
emerged.
(ii) Printing reduced the cost of books.
(iii) Books flooded the market, reaching out to an
evergrowing readership.
(Any two) 1 + 2 = 3
Q. 8. Highlight any three circumstances that led to
the intermingling of the hearing culture and the
reading culture.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		
Describe
any
three
circumstances
that
intermingled the hearing culture and reading
culture.
		[Board Term 1, 2012 (35), 2011 (5800 11, 12, 29, 40)]

PRINT CULTURE AND THE MODERN WORLD

Ans. (i) The rate of literacy was very low in Europe till
the end of the 20th century. In order to attract
people towards books, the printers started
printing popular ballads and folk tales with lot of
illustration.
(ii) Such books were recited at gatherings and it
attracted listeners.
(iii) Thus the oral culture was printed and printed
material was orally transmitted. That’s how oral
and reading culture intermingled.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 9. Highlight any three innovations which have
improved the printing technology from 19th
century onwards. [Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		 Write any three innovations in printing technology
in the 19th century and 20th century Europe ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 17, 34, 39, 42)]
Ans. (i) By the mid-19th century, Richard M. Hoe of New
York had perfected the power driven cylindrical
press. This was capable of printing 8,000 sheets per
hour. This press was particularly useful for printing
newspaper.
(ii) In the late 19th century, the offset press was
developed which would print up to six colours at a
time.
(iii) From the turn of the 20th century, electricallyoperated presses accelerated the printing
operations.
(iv) Methods of feeding paper improved, the quality
of plates became better, automatic paper reels and
photoelectric controls of the colour register were
introduced.
(v) The dust cover or the book jackets were
introduced.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 10. How did Johann Gutenberg developed the first
printing press ?
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, DDE-2014]
Ans. From his childhood, Gutenberg had seen wine
and olive presses. Subsequently, he learnt the art
of polishing stones, became a master goldsmith,
and also acquired the expertise to create lead
moulds used for making trinkets. Drawing on
this knowledge, Gutenberg adapted existing
technology to design his innovation. The olive
press provided the model for the printing press,
and moulds were used for casting the metal types
for the letters of the alphabet. By 1448, Gutenberg
perfected the system.
The first book printed by him was the Bible. About
180 copies were printed and it took three years to
produce them. By the standards of time this was
fast production.
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 11. How did the print popularize at the ideas of the
enlightened thinkers ? Explain.
				
(Board Term 1, DDE-2014)
Or
		How did print help to spread new ideas the led to
the Reformation in Europe ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 26)]

[ 41
Ans. (i) In 1517, the religious reformer Martin Luther
wrote ‘Ninety Five Theses’ criticising many of the
practices and rituals of the Roman Catholic Church.
(ii) Due to writings of Martin Luther, the church got
divided and a new protestant reformation had
started.
(iii) Several scholars, infact think that print brought
about a new intellectual atmosphere and helped
spread the new ideas that led to reformation.
		
1×3=3
Q. 12. Where was the earliest kind of print technology
developed ? Explain that technology.
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. (i) The earliest kind of print technology was
developed in China. This was a system of hand
printing.
(ii) From 594 A.D. onwards, books in China were
printed by rubbing paper against the inked surface.
(iii) As both sides of the thin and porous sheet could
not be printed, the traditional Chinese ‘Accordion
book’ was folded and stitched at the side.
(iv) Superbly skilled craftsmen could duplicate it
with remarkable accuracy which is the beauty of
calligraphy.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 13. Why did James Augustus Hickey claim that the
Bengal Gazette was ‘a commercial paper open to
all but influenced by none’ ? Explain.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Ans. (i) It was a private English weekly magazine in
India independent from colonial influence.
(ii) Hickey not only published a lot of advertisement
including the import and sale of slaves but also
published lots of gossip about the company’s
senior officials in India.
(iii) Governor General Warren persecuted Hickey
and
encouraged
government
sanctioned
newspapers.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 14. What was an “accordion book” ? Describe any two
features of hand printing in China.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		Explain any three features of Chinese ‘accordion
book’.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 23)]
Ans.		'Accordion book' is a traditional chinese book,
folded and stitched at the side.
(i)		
Chinese Accordion books were handprinted.
They were printed by rubbing paper against the
inked surface of wooden blocks.
(ii)		
As both sides of the thin, porous sheet would
not be printed, the traditional chinese ‘Accordion
book’ was folded and stitched at the side.
(iii)		
These accordion books could be duplicated by
superbly-skilled craftsmen with remarkable
accuracy and the beauty of calligraphy.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 15. How did new forms of popular literature appear in
print targeting new audience in the 18th century?
Explain with examples. [Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]

42 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. (i) There were almanacs along with ballads and
folktales. In England, Chap books were carried by
petty Pedlars known as chapman and sold for a
penny.
(ii) Biliotheque Bleue were low-priced books sold in
France.
(iii) There were the romances printed on four to six
pages and the more substantial ‘Histories’ which
were stories of past.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 16. How did the printers manage to attract the people,
largely illiterate, towards printed books ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans. (i) To attract people, the printers started printing
popular ballads and folk tales.
(ii) To attract people books had been incorporated
with lots of illustrations.
(iii) Ballads and folk tales were sung and recited to the
people in gatherings in the villages.
1×3=3
Q. 17. How did Gutenberg personalise the printed
books ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Ans. (i) Borders were illuminated by hand with foliage
and other patterns.
(ii) Books printed for rich had blank space left for
decoration.
(iii) Each buyer could choose the design.
(iv) Verses were highlighted with hand with
colours.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 18. How did print introduce debate and discussion ?
Explain in three points.
		[Board Term 1, 2012 (49), 2011 (5800 11, 13, 17, 42)]
Ans. (i) Print was used to criticize existing practices.
Through print, people could be persuaded to
think differently.
(ii) Even those who disagreed with established
authorities could now print and circulate their
ideas. It shaped new ideas and debates and new
ideas emerged from clashes.
(iii) The religious reformer Martin Luther wrote
ninety five theses criticising many of the practices
and rituals of the Roman Catholic Church. He
challenged the Church to debate his ideas.
(iv) Muslims used print to check conversions.
(v) Hindus used print to encourage people to read
the religious texts in vernacular.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 19. Why did some people fear the effect of easily
available printed book ? Give one example each
from Europe and India ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 15, 22, 36, 45)]
Ans. Some people were feared by the effect of easily
available printed books because rebellious and
irreligious thoughts might spread and the authority
of ‘valuable literature’ would be destroyed.
(i) Europe : In 1517, the religious reformer Martin
Luther wrote ninety five theses criticising many
of the practices and rituals of the Roman Catholic
church and challenged the church to debate his
ideas.

(ii) India : An intense controversy between social
and religious reformer and the Hindu orthodox
was developed over matters such as widow
immolation, monotheism, Brahmanical piothood
and idolatry.
3
Q. 20. How did print come to Europe from China ?
Explain.
			 [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 15, 16, 22, 26, 36, 45)]
Ans. (i) Through silk route in the 11th century, Chinese
paper reached Europe from China. Paper made
possible the production of manuscripts which
were, carefully written by scribes.
(ii) In 1295 Marcopolo, a great explorer, returned to
Italy after many years of exploration in China. He
brought the knowledge of wood block printing
from China and the Italians began producing
books with wood blocks and soon the technology
spread to the other parts of Europe.
(iii) Religious preachers such as the Buddhists were
also helpful in spreading this knowledge from
China to Europe.
1×3=3
Q. 21. Describe the development of printing press after
Gutenberg. [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 16, 26, 46)]
Ans. (i) By 1448, Gutenberg perfected the system of
printing press. The first book printed by Gutenberg
was Bible. About 180 copies were printed and it
took three years to produce them.
(ii) In the hundred years between 1450 and 1550,
printing presses were set up in most of the countries
of Europe.
(iii) Printers from Germany travelled to other countries,
seeking work and helping start new presses. As the
number of printing presses grew, book production
boomed.
(iv) The second half of the 15th century saw 20 million
copies of printed books flooding in the European
market. The number went up in the 16th century to
about 200 million copies.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 22. Why did people in the eighteenth century
Europe think that print culture would bring
enlightenment and end despotism ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 18, 30, 40, 41)]
Ans. The people in the 18th century Europe thought that
print culture would bring enlightenment and end
despotism because :
(i) Books became cheaper and helped the individuals
to read which developed rational thinking,
scientific outlook, liberalism and democratic ideas.
(ii) The writings of the great philosophers like Thomas
Paine, Rousseau and Voltaire spread the ideas of
democracy and also exposed them to monarchial
and church propaganda which finally helped to
end despotism.
(iii) The people were not influenced directly by
everything they read or saw. They accepted some
ideas and rejected others. They interpreted things
in their own way. Print did not directly shape their
minds, but it did open up the possibility of thinking
differently.
1×3=3

PRINT CULTURE AND THE MODERN WORLD

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. How did print introduce a new world of debate
and discussion ? What were its implications in
sphere of religion ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36, 38)]
Or
		How did print create the possibility of wide
circulation of ideas and discussion.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, 6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) Print created the possibility of wide circulation
of ideas leading to debate and discussion. Those
who disagreed with established authorities could
now print and circulate their own views.
(ii) Through printed messages, they could persuade
people to think differently and move them into
action.
Implications on the sphere of religion. The
religious reformer, Martin Luther, wrote Ninety
five Theses criticizing many practices of Roman
Catholic Church. A printed copy of this was
posted on a church door. This led to a division
within the church, The protestant Reformation.
		 (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1½+1½+2=5
Q. 2. Martin Luther remarked “Printing is the ultimate
gift of God and the greatest one.” Explain this
remark in the light of the religious reforms that
took place in Europe in the 16th century.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Or
		 How did Martin Luther’s writing bring reforms in
the religious field ? Explain.
				
[School of Scholars Yavatmal, 2015]
Ans.(i) Martin Luther wrote Ninety Five Theses
criticising the malpractices in the Roman Catholic
Church. He posted a printed copy of it on the
door of a church in Wittenberg.
(ii) Luther’s writings immediately became popular
through printed copies and was read widely.
(iii) 5000 printed copies of Luther’s translation of the
New Testament were sold in a week.
(iv) All these led to a religious debate and marked the
beginning of the Protestant Reformation.
(v) Printing technology played a key role in bringing
religious reforms in the 16th century. Hence
Martin Luther's remarks were apt, effective and
practical.
(Any five)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) (1×5=5)
Q. 3. What difference did printing technology make
in the lives of women and children in the 19th
century ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, 2012 (47)]
Ans. Impact on Women :
(i) Women became important readers and writers.
Penny magazines, especially meant for women,
contained guidelines on proper behaviour and
housekeeping.
(ii) Novel began to be written in the 19th century and
some of the best novelists were women like Jane
Austen, Bronte sisters, George Eliot, etc.

[ 43
5 marks each
(iii) Their writing created a new image of women
with will, strength of personality, determination
and power to think.
Impact on Children :
(i) Primary education became compulsory from the
late 19th century.
(ii) School textbooks, rural folk tales in edited
versions, fairy tales and new stories were
published for children.
(iii) Grimm brothers of Germany spent years to collect
traditional folk tales from peasants and France
and set up a children’s press in 1857.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 4. Describe any five uses of print culture in the 17th
century China.
(Board Term 1, DDE-2014)
Ans. (i) By the 17th century, as urban culture bloomed in
China, the uses of print diversified.
(ii) Print was no longer used just by scholar-officials.
(iii) Merchants used print in their everyday life, as they
collected trade information.
(iv) The new readership preferred fictional narratives,
poetry, autobiographies, anthologies of literary
masterpieces and romantic plays.
(v) Rich women began to read and many women
began publishing their poetry and plays.
(vi) Wives of scholar-officials published their works
and courtsmen wrote about their lives.
		
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 5. How far is it right to say that the print culture was
responsible for the French Revolution.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		Why did some historians feel that printing
technology created the basis for French
Revolution ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Ans. (i) Print popularized the ideas of enlightened
thinkers on traditions, superstitions and despotism.
(ii) They advocated reasons.
(iii) People read books of Voltaire and Rousseau. Print
created dialogue and debate.
(iv) People started discussion and evaluated the
royalty.
(v) Print literature mocked the royalty.
(vi) These kind of print literature circulated
underground and it created awareness among
people and formed the basis of French Revolution.
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 6. Explain five effects of print revolution.		
		
[Board Term I, 2013 (553K)]
Ans.		Impact of print revolution :
(i) New reading public was emerged.
(ii) The hearing people became reading people.
(iii) Religious debates due to fear of prints led to
distinctive interpretation of faith.

44 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(iv) Printing transformed the lives of the people.
(v) It opened new ways of looking at things.
(vi) Print culture also affected the life of poor people
and women in many ways. The print gave birth
to new form of popular literature. Very small
books were brought out. They were sold across
roads. The poor people brought these books and
read with great interest. Books were cheap so that
the poor people can also afford them.
(vii) Women’s reading increased enormously in
middle class homes. Liberal husbands and fathers
began educating their women folk at home and
send them to schools. Women schools were also
set up.
(Any five)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×5=5
Q. 7. Describe any five strategies developed by the
printers and publishers in the 19th century to sell
their products.
[Board Term I, 2013 (BHTK)]
Ans.		Some of the important strategies adopted by the
printers and publishers to sell books are :
(i) They bring out Serialized novels. The first
serialized novel was shilling series. It was a cheap
series that was very popular and was sold in
England in 1920’s.
(ii) The advertisers put up advertisements at strategic
public locations such as building, railway station,
etc. to attract buyers and improve sales.
(iii) The dust cover or the book jacket is a 20th century
innovation.
(iv) One of the great innovations was the introduction
of cheap paper back books in the 1930’s, in during
the Great depression in order to keep the steady
sale of books at the time of recessions. Cheap
paper back editions were brought to counter the
effect of the Great depression in the 1930’s.
(v) The shilling series was also considered an
important innovation at this time.
(Any five)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×5=5

Q. 8. What were the three difficulties in copying
manuscripts ? What was the use of printing press?
Describe.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Ans.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Difficulties in copying manuscripts were :
Copying manuscript was an expensive business.
It was laborious and time-consuming.
Manuscripts themselves were fragile, awkward to
handle and could not be easily carried around or
read easily.
Use of printing press :
(i) It enable people to produce books at greater
speed.
(ii) The production of books in large number created
a new culture of reading and enlarged the number
of readers.
3+2=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Q. 9. How did the scientists and philosophers in the
18th century Europe find it easier to reach out to
people ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35, 48)]
Ans. (i) Periodicals, journals and newspapers in the
early 18th century combined information from
various fields.
(ii) That’s how the ideas of scientists and philosophers
became more accessible to the common people.
(iii) Ancient and medieval scientific texts were
compiled and published maps and scientific
diagrams were printed.
(iv) Scientists such as Issac Newton could influence
a large number of people in scientific area, by
publishing their discoveries.
(v) Thinkers such as Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Jean
Jacques Rousseau were also widely read.
(vi) Ideas about science reason and rationality found
its way into popular literature. (Any five) 1×5=5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

TOPIC-2

The Growth of press in 19th century India
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What did political leaders and reformers like
Jyotiba Phule, Gandhiji, B.R. Ambedker and
Periyar Ramaswamy opposed ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. Discrimination against the outcaste groups, caste
inequalities.
1
Q. 2. Who wrote her autobiography ‘Amar Jiban’
published in 1876 ?
Ans. Rash Sundari Debi.
1
Q. 3. When did the first printing press come to India ?
Ans. In the middle of the 16th century.
1

1 mark each

Q. 4. Name the first weekly paper published in India.
Ans. Bengal Gazette.
1
Q. 5. Name the newspaper started by Bal Gangadhar
Tilak.
Ans. Kesari.
1
Q. 6. The printing press was first introduced in India
by Whom ?
Ans. Portuguese missionaries.
1
Q. 7. Which book reflects the light of the ‘lower castes’
and poor in India ?
Ans. Gulamgiri, Chhote aur Bade ka Sawal and Sacchi
Kavitayan.
1

[ 45

PRINT CULTURE AND THE MODERN WORLD

Q. 8. Why did the circulation of hand written
manuscripts remain limited ?
Ans. Because they were fragile and awkward to
handle.
1
Q. 9. Which book published in the 19th and the 20th
century, did not highlight the struggles of the
downtrodden classes ?

Ans. Istri Dharm Vichar.

Q. 10. Who wrote about the injustices of the caste system
in ‘Gulamgiri’ ?
Ans. Jyotiba Phule.

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why were women not educated in India in the
early part of nineteenth century ? Give any two
reasons.
[Board Term 1, 2015 (6AP67LB)]
Ans. (i) This was because of the superstitions and
myths that prevailed in the society.
(ii) Conservation Hindus believed that a literate girl
would be widowed and Muslims feared that
educated women would be corrupted by reading
Urdu romances.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) (1×3=3)
Q. 2. What is a Manuscript ? Why were they not used
widely ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36, 40), 2011
				 (5800 12, 18, 22, 30, 33, 39, 41, 41), 2010 (B1)]
Ans. (i) Manuscripts were documents or books written
by hand.
(ii) They were not used widely because :
		
(a) They could not satisfy the ever increasing
demand for books.
		
(b) They were expensive as copying was an
expensive, laborious and time consuming
business.
		
(c) Manuscripts were fragile, awkward to handle
and could not be carried around or read
easily.
		
(d) Their circulation was limited.
		
		
(Anytwo) 1+2=3
		
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 3. For what purpose did Ram Chaddha, publish ‘Istri
Dharm Vichar’ ?
[Board Term 1, 2015, School of Yavatmal, 2015]
Ans. (i) In Punjab, a similar folk literature about
discussing women issues was widely printed from
the early 20th century.
(ii) Ram Chaddha published the fast selling ‘Istri
Dharm Vichar’ to teach women how to be obedient
wives.
1½ + 1½ = 3
Q. 4. What restrictions were imposed by the Vernacular
Press Act on the Indian Press ? Explain.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 15, 20, 33, 36)]
Or
		Why was Vernacular Press Act passed ? Explain
about this Act.[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOK62SB]
Ans. (i) The Vernacular Press Act provided the
government with extensive rights to censor reports
and editorials in the vernacular press.
(ii) The government kept regular track of the
vernacular newspapers published in different
provinces.

1

1

3 marks each
(iii) When a report was judged as seditious, the
newspaper was warned.
(iv) If the warning was ignored, the press was liable
to be seized and the printing machinery could be
confiscated.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 5. Evaluate the efforts made by the British in India to
impose censorship on the press.
				

[Board Term 1, 2013 (BHTK)]

Ans. (i) By the 1820’s, the Calcutta Supreme Court
passed certain regulations to control press
freedom and the country began encouraging
publication of newspapers that would celebrate
British Rule.
(ii) In 1835, faced with urgent petitions by editors of
English and Vernacular newspapers, Governor
general Bentick agreed to revise press laws.
(iii) In 1878, the Vernacular Press Act was passed,
modelled on the Irish Press Laws. It provided
the government with extensive rights to censor
reports and editorials in the Vernacular Press.
From now the government kept regular track of
the Vernacular newspaper published in different
provinces. When a report was judged seditious,
the newspaper was warned and if the warning was
ignored, the press was liable to be seized and the
printing machinery could be confiscated. 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 6. Why did the attitude of the colonial Government
towards the freedom of the press change after the
revolt of 1857 ? What repressive measures were
put into place ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (51)]
Ans.		After the revolt of 1857, the attitude to freedom of
press changed. Enraged English officials clamped
down the native press because of their nationalists
activities.
(i) In 1878, the Vernacular Press Act was passed.
It provided the government extensive rights to
censor reports.
(ii) The government kept regular track of the
Vernacular newspaper, when a report was
judged as seditious the newspaper was warned,
the press was liable to be seized and machinery
could be confiscated.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 7. Examine the role of missionaries in the growth of
press in India.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]

46 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans.(i) The printing press first came to Goa in Western
India through Portuguese missionaries in mid
16th century.
(ii) Jesuit priest learnt Konkani and printed several
texts and nearly 50 books were printed in
Konkani.
(iii) Catholic priests printed the first Tamil book in
1579 at Cochin.
(iv) The first Malayalam book was printed in 1713.
(v) The Dutch Protestant missionaries had printed 32
Tamil texts.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 8. Explain the new visual culture in print which
developed in the nineteenth century.
				 [Board Term 1, 2012 (58), 2011 (5800 11, 43)]
Ans. (i) With the setting up of an increasing number
of printing presses, visual images could be easily
reproduced in multiple copies.
(ii) Painters like Raja Ravi Verma produced images
for mass circulation.
(iii) Cheap prints and calendars were easily available
in the bazaar. By the 1870s, caricatures and
cartoons were also being published in Journals
and newspapers commenting on social and
political issues.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 9. Describe any three methods by which printed
books became more accessible to common
people.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (60)]
Ans.		Three methods by which printed books became
more accessible to common people :
(i) Very cheap books were brought in Madras town
and sold on the cross roads, allowing poor people
travelling to markets to buy them.
(ii) Mill workers set up libraries, e.g., in Bombay.
(iii) Libraries were located mostly in cities and in
prosperous villages.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Q. 10. Explain the role of print in the religious reforms
in India.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 24, 28, 35)]
Ans. (i) From the early 19th century, there were intense
debates around religious issues. Different groups
confronted the changes happening within colonial
society in different ways and offered a variety
of new interpretations of the beliefs of different
religions.
(ii) Some criticised existing practices and campaigned
for reform, while others countered the arguments
of reformers. These debates were carried out in
public and in print.
(iii) Printed tracts and newspaper not only spread
the new ideas, but they shaped the nature of the
debate.
(iv) A wider public could now participate in these
public discussions and express their views. New
ideas emerged through these clashes of opinions.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 11. Print did not only stimulate the publications of
conflicting opinions among different communities
but also connected them in 19th century India.
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 18, 43)]
Ans. (i) From early 19th century, there were heated
debates around religious issues. Debates were
carried out in public and in print.
(ii) Printed tracts and newspapers spread new ideas
and shaped the nature of debate. A wider public
could participate in these public discussions. New
ideas emerged through clash of opinions.
(iii) Intense controversies between social and religious
reformers and Hindu orthodoxy over issues like
widow immolation, monotheism, idolatry etc.
arose.
(iv) In Bengal as the debate developed, tracts and
newspaper proliferated, circulating a variety of
arguments.
(v) Rammohan Roy published ‘Sambad Kaumudi’
from 1821 and Hindu orthodoxy commissioned
Samachar Chandrika. Newspapers conveyed news
from one place to another.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What led the colonial government to pass the
Vernacular Press Act in 1878 ? How did it affect
the vernacular Newspaper ?
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. (i) Nationalists in India used print media to
publish the evil affects of British rule and spread
new ideas.
(ii) As vernacular newspapers became assertively
nationalist, the colonial government decided to
take strong measures.
(iii) In 1878 the vernacular press act was passed which
provided the government with intensive rights
to censor reports and efitorials in the vernacular
press.
(iv) The government started keeping regular track
on vernacular news papers. If it published some
material which was considered to be seditious,
the government seized the press and confiscated
the printing machines.
(v) Despite
repressive
measures
nationalist
newspapers grew in numbers in all parts of India.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1×5=5
Q. 2. What was the attitude of liberal and conservative
Indians towards women’s reading ? How did
woman like Kailashbashini Debi respond to this
in her writings ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36)]
Or
		Describe the attitude of liberal and conservative
Indian’s towards women’s reading ?

PRINT CULTURE AND THE MODERN WORLD

Ans. (i) Liberal husbands and fathers began educating
their women folk at home and sent them to
schools.
(ii) Conservative Hindus believed that a literate girl
would be widowed and Muslims feared that
educated women would be corrupted by reading
romantic books.
Kailashbashini Debi wrote books highlighting
the experiences of women-how women were
imprisoned at home, kept in ignorance, forced to
do hard domestic labour.
1½+1½+2=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 3. How were the manuscripts written in India before
the age of print ? What were their drawbacks and
effect ?
(Board Term 1, NCT-2014)
Ans. (i) In India, manuscripts were written on palm
leaves or on handmade paper before the age of
print.
(ii) Pages were sometimes beautifully illustrated.
(iii) They would be either pressed between wooden
covers or sewn together to ensure preservation.
(iv) Manuscripts continued to be produced till well
after the introduction of print, down to the late
nineteenth century.
(v) Manuscripts, however, were highly expensive and
fragile. They had to be handled carefully and they
could not be read easily as script was written in
different styles.
1×5=5
Q. 4. “From the late 19th century, issues of caste
discrimination began to be written about in many
printed tracts and essays.” Support the statement
by giving examples.
				

[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Or

		How did issues of caste discrimination begin to
write in many printed tracts and essays from the
late nineteenth century ? Explain with examples.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (553K), 2012 (33, 37)]
Ans.		From 19th century, issues of caste discrimination
began to be written.
(i) Jyotiba Phule, the Maratha pioneer of low caste,
started protest movement. He wrote about the
injustice of the caste system in his Gulamgiri.
(ii) B. R. Ambedkar in Maharashtra and E.V. Ramaswamy in Madras wrote powerfully on caste.
Their writings were read by people all over India.
(iii) Local protest movements and sets also created a
lot of journals and tracts.
(iv) Kashibaba millworker wrote and published
‘Chhote Aur Bade ka Sawal’.
(v) Banglore cotton mill workers set up libraries to
educate themselves.
(vi) Workers were overburdened and lacked the
education to write much.
(Any five) 1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)

[ 47
Q. 5. Evaluate the role of print in connecting various
communities in different parts of India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. (i) In Bengal as the debate developed, tracts and
newspapers proliferated, circulating a variety of
arguments.
(ii) To reach a wider audience, the ideas were printed
in the everyday spoken language of ordinary
people.
(iii) Ram Mohan Roy published the ‘Sambad Kaumudi’
from 1821 and the Hindu orthodoxy commissioned
the ‘Samachar Chandrika’ to oppose his opinion.
(iv) A wider range of people could not participate in
these public discussions and express their views.
(v) New ideas emerged through these clashes of
opinions.
(vi) Newspapers conveyed news from one place to
another, creating pan-Indian identities.
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 6. Explain how print culture assisted the growth of
Nationalism in India.
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (BHTK), 2012 (58), 2011
(5800 11, 12, 17, 23, 28, 35, 38, 43, 44)]
Or
		What was the contribution of print culture in the
growth of nationalism in India ? How did the
British attempt to check them ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 13)]
Ans.		Print culture, i.e., Press and literature played a
crucial role in growth and spread of nationalism
in India :
(i) In the 19th century, huge quantity of national
literature was created. Revolutionised minds of
people inspired them to throw away the British
yoke.
(ii) India Mirror, Bombay Samachar, The Hindu,
Kesari-Indian newspapers exerted deep imprint
on the minds of people.
(iii) Nationalist press reported on colonial misrule and
encouraged nationalist activities. For example,
when Punjab revolutionaries were deported
in 1907, Balgangadhar Tilak wrote with great
sympathy about them.
(iv) Gandhiji spread his ideas of Swadeshi in a
powerful way through newspaper. Many
Vernacular newspapers came up in India to
spread nationalism.
British attempt to check them :
(i) In the 1820s, the Calcutta Supreme Court passed
regulations to control freedom of press.
(ii) Vernacular Press Act provided government with
extensive rights to censor reports and editorials in
the Vernacular press.
3+2=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 7. How did the printed books of India attract the
poor class as readers in the 19th century ? Explain.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Or
		What efforts were made to spread the benefits
of print culture for the poor people in the 19th
century India ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (56)

48 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. Sources of Attraction :
(i) Very cheap small books were brought to market
in the 19th century.
(ii) Public libraries were set up to give an easy access
to books.
(iii) Kashibaba of Kanpur published ‘Chhote Aur
Bade ka Sawal’ where caste and class exploitation
were linked.
(iv) Sacchi Kavitayen, the poems of another Kanpur
mill worker who wrote under the pen name of
Sudarshan Chakra also attracted the mill workers
towards reading printed books, since they could
see their lives and sufferings reflected in such
books.
(v) Bombay and Bangalore Cotton mill workers set
up libraries to educate themselves. These libraries
were sponsored by social reformers.
1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 8. What were the effects of the spread of print culture
for poor people in 19th century India ? Describe.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (60) 2010 (B1)]
Ans.		Effects of Print culture on poor people :
(i) Cheap small books were brought to the markets
in Madras and were then sold.
(ii) Public libraries were set up from early 20th century
expanding the access to books.
(iii) When issues to caste discrimination were written
by Ambedkar, Jyotiba Phule, it was read by
people. ‘Gulamgiri’ of Jyotiba Phule exposed the
ill treatment to the low castes.
(iv) Local protest movements and sects criticised
ancient scriptures.
(v) Workers in factories wrote and published to show
links between caste and class explotation.
(vi) Bangalore cotton mill workers set up libraries to
educate themselves.
(Any five) 1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Q. 9. “Printing press played a major role in shaping the
Indian society of the 19th century.” Support the
statement by giving examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]
Ans.		The print culture had a significant impact on the
growth of nationalism in India.
(i) In spite of passing a Vernacular Press Act,
nationalist newspapers grew in numbers.
(ii) They reported on colonial misrule and encouraged
nationalist activities.
(iii) The British government tried to put down
nationalised criticism but there were more
protests.
(iv) ‘Punjab revolutionaries were deported,’ Tilak
wrote in Kesari.
(v) It led his imprisonment in 1908 provoking terms
of protest.
1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 10. How did print culture affect the life of poor
people and women in nineteenth century India ?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]
Ans. (i) The print culture gave birth to new forms of
popular literature. Very small books were brought
out. They were sold cross roads. The poor people
brought these books and read with great interest.
Books were cheap even the poor could afford to
buy them. Public libraries were set up.
(ii) The print culture made the women important,
as readers as well as writers. Women’s reading
increased enormously in middle class homes.
Liberal husbands and fathers began educating
their women folk at home and send them to
schools. Women’s schools were set up.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2½+2½=5



5

CHAPTER

NOVELS,
SOCIETY AND
HISTORY

SYLLABUS
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)



Emergence of the novel as a genre in the west.
The relationship between the novel and changes in modern society.
Early novels in 19th century India.
A study of two or three major writers.

QUICK REVIEW
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

The novel allowed flexibility in the form of writing.
The novel was the first mass-produced item to be sold.
TOPIC - 1
Emergence of the Novel in the West .... P. 52
In 1836, Charles Dicken’s “Pickwick Papers” was
serialised in a magazine.
TOPIC - 2
Charles Dickens in his novels focussed on the terrible
Emergence of the Novel in India .... P. 55
conditions of urban life under industrial capitalism.
The vast majority of readers of the novel lived in the city.
The novel was a bridge between the rural and urban
communities.
The novel used the vernacular language.
The most exciting element of the novel was the involvement of women.
The women novelists were broad-minded.
Novels for young boys were full of adventure.
The early novels made the readers feel they were part of a superior community of fellow colonialists.
Novels began to be written in the 17th century, but bloomed in the 18th century.
Henry Fielding, Walter Scott and Samuel Richardson are renowned novelists of the 18th century.
A famous novel of Charles Dickens is Oliver Twist, 1838.
Emile Zola’s ‘Germinal’ (1885) is based on the grim conditions of miner’s lives.
Love stories written for adolescent girls such as ‘Ramona’ by Helen Hunt Jackson and a series entitled
‘What Katy Did’ by Sarah Chauncey Woolsey were very popular.
Writers like Joseph Conrad wrote novels that showed the darker side of colonial occupation.
Banabhatta’s Kadambari written in Sanskrit in the 7th century is an early example of stories in prose.
The modern novel form developed in India in the 19th century.
Some of the earliest Indian novels were written in Bengali and Marathi. Examples—include Yamuna
Paryatan (1857) and ‘Muktamala’ (1861).
Translations of novel into different regional languages helped to spread the popularity of the novel.
Novels appeared in South Indian languages during the period of colonial rule.
‘Indulekha’ was the first modern novel in Malayalam.
Kandukuri Viresalingam’s Telugu novel was written by Rajasekhara Caritamu.
The first modern novel of Srinivas Das, published in 1882 was titled as ‘Pariksha-Guru’.
The famous novels of Devaki Nandan Khatri was ‘Chandrakanta’.
Premchand’s novels, especially ‘Rangbhoomi’ and ‘Godan’ were his best known works.
Another famous novel of Premchand was ‘Sewa Sadan’.
Bangla novelist Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay’s first novel was ‘Durgesh-Nandini’.
Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay was the most popular novelist in Bengal and the whole of India.
Vernacular novels were a valuable source of information on native life and customs of India.

50 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

zzIn

Tamil, detective and mystery novels were reprinted as many as twenty two times.
also began to write novels Stories of love were their main theme.
zzRokeyya Sakhawat Hossein wrote a satiric fantasy in English called Sultana’s Dream.
zz‘Padmarag’ written by Rokeyya Hossein showed the need for women to reform their condition by their own actions.
zz‘Karuna O Phulmonir Bibaran’ written by Hannah Mullens was reportedly the first novel in Bengali.
zzSailabala Ghosh Jaya, could only write because her husband protected her.
zzPotheri Kunjambu from North-Kerala wrote a novel called ‘Saraswativijayam’ mounting a strong attack on caste
oppression.
zzAdvaita Malla Burman’s ‘Titash Ekti Nadir Naam’ is an epic about the Mallas.
zzVaikkom Muhammad Basheer was a renowned early Muslim writer.
zzBhudeb Mukhopadhyay’s ‘Anguriya Binimoy’ was the first historical novel written in Bengali.
zzBankim’s Anandamath was a novel that inspired many freedom fighters.
zzImportant Novels of the young :
* Treasure Island		 — R.L. Stevenson
* Ramona		 — Helen Hunt
* Jungle Book		 — Rudyard Kipling
* What Katy Did		 — Sarah Chauncey Woolsey
zzImportant Indian Novelist and their works :
* Titash Ekti Nadir Naam		 — Advaita Malla Burman
* Saraswativijayam		 — Potheri Kunjambu
* Anandmath		 — Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay
* Pariksha Guru		 — Shrinivas Das
* Godan		 — Prem Chand
* Sultana’s Dream		 — Rokeya Hossein
* Durgeshnandini		 — Bankim Chandra Chattopadhaya
* Indulekha		 — O. Chandu Menon
* Karuna O Phulmonir Bibaran		 — Hanah Mullens
* Nirmala, Rangbhoomi		 — Premchand
* Muktamala		 — Moreshwar Halbe
* Chandrakanta		 — Devaki Nandan Khatri
* Yamuna Paryatan		 — Baba Padmanji
zzImportant Foreign Novelist, and their works :
* Germinal		 — Emile Zola
* Jungle Book		 — Rudyard Kipling
* Ramona		 — Helen Hunt
* Major of Casterbridge		 — Thomas Hardy
* Robinson Crusoe		 — Daniel Defoe
* Jane Eyre		 — Charlotte Bronte
* A tale of Two Cities, David Copperfield		 — Charles Dickens.
zzWomen

KNOW THE TERMS
zzEpistolary

: Written in the form of a series of letters.
: The language spoken by a particular area or group.
zzSerialised : A format in which story is published in instalments, each part in a new issue of a journal.
zzSatire : A way of criticising a person or an idea in a humorous way.
zzBhadralok : A Bengali word, meaning a gentleman.
zzColonialism : Policy of acquiring or maintaining colonies.
zzMeyeli : A language spoken by Bengali women.
zzKissa-goi : Art of storytelling.
zzFantasy : Fanciful composition or writing involving imaginary characters etc.
zzEpic : A long poem narrating adventures or achievements of a heroic figure or a nation.
zzGentlemanly classes : People who claimed noble birth and high social position. They were supposed to set the
standard for proper behaviour.
zzHistorical novel : The novel which is based on historical events.
zzDastan : The long tradition of prose tales of adventure and heroism in Persian and Urdu.
zzJatra : Dramatic performance in open theatres. It is very popular in rural society of Bengal.
zzProtagonist : The main character in a play, film or book.
zzVernacular

NOVELS, SOCIETY AND HISTORY

[ 51

zzSlave

trader : A trader who buys and sells slaves.
: Fictitious name used by an author only for the purpose of writing without exposing one’s identity.
zzKabirlarai : A Bengali word meaning extempore poetry contests among poets.
zzPen-name

KNOW THE DATES
zz1719

: Daniel Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe was published.
: Circulating libraries were set up in Europe.
zz1749 : Henry Fielding’s Tom Jones was published.
zz1828 : The famous Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy was born.
zz1836 : Charles Dicken’s Pickwick Papers was serialised in a magazine.
zz1838 : Charles Dicken’s Oliver Twist was published.
zz1854 : Clarles Dicken’s wrote about the terrible effects of industrialization on people’s lives and characters in the
novel ‘Hard Times’.
zz1857 : Baba Padmanji’s Marathi novel ‘Yamuna Paryatan’ was published.
zz1857 : Bhudeb Mukhopadhyay’s ‘Anguriya Binimoy’, the first historical novel written in Bengal was published.
zz1865 : Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay’s novel ‘Durgeshnandini’ was published.
zz1878 : Kandukuri Viresalingam’s Telugu novel ‘Rajasekhara Caritamu’ was published.
zz1882 : First Hindi novel ‘Pariksha Guru’ written by Srinivas Das was published.
zz1882 : Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay’s novel ‘Anandmath’, which inspired freedom fighters was published.
zz1883 : R.L. Stevenson’s ‘Treasure Island’ was published.
zz1885 : Emile Zola’s ‘Germinal’ shows the grim conditions of miners’ lives.
zz1886 : Thomas Hardy’s ‘The Mayor of Casterbridge’ was published.
zz1889 : O Chandu Menon’s ‘Indulekha’, the first modern novel in Malayalam was published.
zz1892 : Potheri Kunjambu, a lower caste writer from North Kerala, wrote a famous novel called ‘Saraswati Vijayam’.
zz1894 : Rudyard Kipling’s ‘Jungle Book’ was published. It became great hit among youngsters.
zz1905 : Rokeya Hossein wrote a satiric fantasy in English called ‘Sultana’s Dream’.
zz1916 : Premchand’s novel ‘Sewasadan’ was published.
zz1936 : Premchand’s novel ‘Godan’ was published and became his best known work.
zz1956 : Advaita Malla Burman’s ‘Titash Ekti Nadir Naam’, an epic about the Mallas, a community of fishermen, was
published.
zz1740

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Novels in England in the 19th century
		http://www.nvcc.edu/home/ataormina/novels/history/19thcent.html
2. Indian Literature and Novels
		http://www.indianetzone.com/41/history_indian_novels.html

FLOWCHART

52 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

TOPIC-1

Emergence of the Novel in the West
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Who is the author of the ‘Jungle Book’ ?
[Board Term I, 2015 DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. Rudyard Kipling.
1
Q. 2. Name the novel written by Daniel Defoe,
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. Robinson Crusoe.
1
Q. 3. Which problem of the society was focused in the
novel ‘Hard Times’ written by Charles Dickens ?
Ans. Terrible effects of industrialisation.
1
Q. 4. Who wrote the novel ‘Oliver Twist’ ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. Charles Dickens.
1
Q. 5. Who wrote ‘Pickwick Papers’, the first serialised
novel ?
Ans. Charles Dickens.
1
Q. 6. Which book was written with adolescent girls in
mind ?




1 mark each
Ans.
Ramona.
1
Q. 7.
Who published the ‘Tom Jones’ in six volumes ?
Ans.
Henry Fielding.
1
Q. 8.
Which country was the first where novel took
firm root ?
Ans.
England and France.
1
Q. 9.
The hero of which novel finds himself shipwrecked on an island, rescues a native, makes him
a slave and gives him the name Friday ?
Ans.
Robinson Crusoe.
1
Q. 10.
Who is the author of the novel ‘Mayor of
Casterbridge’ ?
Ans.
Thomas Hardy.
1
Q. 11.
Which book by Charles Dickens has the tale
of a poor orphan who lived in a world of petty
criminals and beggars ?
Ans.
Oliver Twist.
1
Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Highlight the social changes in Britain which led
to an increase in women readers.
			
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) As the middle classes became more affluent,
women got more leisure time to read and write
novels.
(ii) Novels began to explore the world of women,
their emotions, identities, experiences and
problems.
(iii) Domestic life became an essential subject of
novels-a field women had an authority to speak
about. (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1 × 3=3
Q. 2. Describe the theme of Charlotte Bronte’s novels,
giving an example.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]

3 marks each
Ans. (i) Charlotte Bronte dealt with women who broke
established norms of society before adjusting to
them. Such stories allowed women readers to
sympathise with rebellious actions.
(ii) In Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre, Published in
1874, young Jane is shown as independent and
assertive. While girls of her time were expected to
be quiet and well behaved, Jane at the age of ten
protests against the hypocrisy of her elders with
startling bluntness.
(iii) She tells her Aunt who is always unkind to her :
'People think you a good women, but you are
bad... You are deceitful! I will never call you aunt
as long as live.'
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1 × 3=3

NOVELS, SOCIETY AND HISTORY

Q. 3. Explain how novel reading became a popular
source of pleasure in India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. (i) In India, novels became a popular medium of
entertainment among middle class.
(ii) The circulation of printed books allowed people
to amuse themselves in new ways.
(iii) Picture books were translated in other languages.
(iv) Popular songs composed on contemporary
events.
(v) Stories in newspaper and magazine offered new
forms of entertainment.
(Any there)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 3
Q. 4. How did access to books create a new culture of
reading ? Examine any 3 points.
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. (i) The worlds created by novels were absorbing
and believable, and seemingly real.
(ii) While reading novels, the reader was transported
to another person’s world, and began looking at
life as it was experienced by the characters of the
novel.
(iii) Besides, novels allowed individuals the pleasure
of reading in private, as well as the joy of publicly
reading or discussing stories with friends or
relatives.
1×3=3
Q. 5. How does Daniel Defoe’s ‘Robinson Crusoe’
justify colonialism ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, 2012 (51), 2011
(5800 11, 16, 18, 37, 44)]
Or
		Describe the role of early novels with the help
of an example that they promoted colonialism in
Europe.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (64)]
Or
		How did the novels written in the 18th century
glorify colonization ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (47)]
Ans. (i) Writing of novels and colonizing the world
started simultaneously in Europe.
(ii) These novels glorified colonialism. For example,
the hero of Daniel Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe is an
adventurer and slave trader. Shipwrecked on an
island, he treats the coloured people as inferior.
He rescues a native and renames him as ‘Friday’
and tries to change him culturally. His behaviour
was not seen as unacceptable.
(iii) Most of the writers and readers believed that the
colonized people were primitive and barbaric
and the colonial rule was essential to civilize
them.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 6. On which issue and what did Charles Dickens
wrote in his novel ‘Hard Times’ ? Describe.
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Or
		Explain any three aspects highlighted by Charles
Dicknes in his novel ‘Hard Times’.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]

[ 53
Ans. Dickens wrote about :
(i) Europe in the industrial age.
(ii) Terrible effects of industrialization on the lives of
people.
(iii) Terrible conditions under industrial capitalism.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 7. “The novels bring together many cultures.” Justify
the statement.
(Board Term 1, NCT-2014)
Or
		“The novels bring together many cultures.”
Support the statement with suitable points.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 18, 30, 36)]
Ans. (i) By coming closer to different spoken languages
of the people, the novel produces the sense of a
shared world between diverse people in a nation.
(ii) Novels may combine classical languages and
languages of the streets and make them all a part of
Vernaculars.
1½+1½=3
Q. 8. How did serialization of novels increased the
popularity of novel and magazines ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (553K), 2012 (35)]
Ans. (i) In 1836, Charles Dicken’s Pickwick Papers
were serialized in a magazine.
(ii) Magazines were attractive and cheaper since they
were illustrated.
(iii) Serialization of novels allowed the readers to
enjoy suspense and discuss the characters for
weeks in the anticipation of next plot of the story.
(iv) Serialization of novels not only increased the
circulation of magazines but also made novels
more popular.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 9. What did G.A. Henry write about in his novels
which attracted the young ?
			 [Board Term 1, 2012 (55), 2011 (5800 12, 18, 36)]
Ans. (i) G.A. Henry’s historical adventure novels for
boys were widely popular during the height of
British empire.
(ii) They created excitement and adventure of
conquering strange lands. His stories were set in
Mexico, Alexandria and Siberia.
(iii) His novels were always about young boys who
witnessed grand historical events.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 10. How did Jane Austen portray the women of the
19th century in her novels ?
				 [Board Term 1, 2012 (36), 2011 (5800 27, 40)]
Ans. (i) Jane Austen’s novel gives us a glimpse of the
world of women in rural society in the early
nineteenth century.
(ii) Her novel makes us think about a society which
encouraged women to look for good marriages
and wealthy or propertied husbands.
(iii) In the novel ‘Pride and Prejudice’, Jane Austen
portrays the female characters as pre-occupied
with marriage and money and states ‘a single
man in possession of a good fortune, must be in
want of a wife'.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

54 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 11. Differentiate between the novels written by
Charlotte Bronte and the novels written by Jane
Austen ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Ans. Jane Austen : Her novels give us a glimpse of the
women’s world in refined rural society in the early
19th century Britain. It portrays a society which
encourages women to look for a wealthy husband.
Characters of her novel ‘Pride and Prejudice’ are
preoccupied with marriage and money.
		Charlotte Bronte : Her novels portrayed women
who broke established norms of the society
before adjusting to them. This won the sympathy
of women readers. Jane, a character in Jane Eyre,
was shown as a quite assertive and independent
character who protested against the hypocracy of
her elders.
1½+1½=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 12. Why were children prevented from reading
novels ? Explain three valid reasons.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (67)]
Ans.		Children were prevented from reading novels
because :
(i) Children would get carried away from their real
surroundings into an imaginary world.
(ii) It was feared that children would stray away from
normal, disciplined life and would become rebels.
(iii) The novel would have immoral influences on
children and they would become corrupt.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 13. Describe three measures adopted to make the
novels more accessible to the people in eighteenth
century Europe.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (68)]
Ans.		Measures adopted to make novels accessible to
the people :
(i) Introduction of circulating libraries.
(ii) Hiring out novels by the hour.
(iii) Technological improvements in printing reduced
the price of novels.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 14. Why did Henry Fielding, a novelist of the early
18th century, claim that he was founder of a new
province of writing where he could make his own
laws ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (62)]
Ans. (i) Readership for printed books grew and
earnings of authors increased.
(ii) This freed them from financial dependence
on the patronage of aristocrats and gave them
independence to experiment with different
literacy styles.
(iii) The novels allowed flexibility in the form of
writing. Hence, Henry Fielding remarked so.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 15. Name one famous women novelist in the 19th
century England. Describe the different ways in
which women novelists portrayed women.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Ans. (i) Jane Austen : Pride and Prejudice
(ii) Charlotte Bronte’s : Jane Eyre (Any one)
		
(a) They encouraged women to look for good
marriages and find wealthy or propertied
husbands.
		
(b) They also wrote about women who broke the
established norms of society.		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 16. Distinguish between Epistolary and Serialised
types of novels with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37)]
Ans. (i) Epistolary novels were written in the forms of
series of letters.
Examples : Samuel Richardson’s-Pamela
(ii) Serialised novels were written in a format of a
story which was published in installments, i.e.,
each part in a new issue of journal.
Example : Charles Dickens, Pickwick Papers.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1½+1½=3
Q. 17. Elaborate upon the contribution of Charles
Dickens in the field of novel writing.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (50)]
Or
		Novels of Charles Dickens deal with which
changes of the 19th century Britain ? Mention any
three such changes.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (56)]
Or
		Which type of problems were highlighted by the
novelist that the Charles Dickens in his novels ?
Explain any two such problems.
				
[Broad Term 1, 2012 (50)]
Ans. (i) He wrote about the terrible effects of
industrialization.
(ii) He wrote about the pollution that the
industrialization caused.
(iii) Dickens criticized the greed for profits.
(iv) He criticized the idea that human beings were
treated as simple instruments of production.
(v) He talked about the terrible conditions of urban
life.
(iv) He discussed about the exploitation of children/
orphans in ‘Oliver Twist’.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Highlight the various themes of novels written by
Charles Dickens and Thomas Hardy, in the 19th
century.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. (i) Dickens wrote about the terible effects of
industrialisation.
5 marks each
(ii) Dickens criticised the idea that human beings were
treated as simple instruments of production.
(iii) Dickens spoke about the exploitation of children/
orphans in ‘Oliver Twist’.
(iv) Thomas Hardy highilighted the advantages and
disadvantages of the new order.
(v) Thomas Hardy used Vernacular language spoken
by different groups of people in his writing. 1×5=5
Q. 2. Describe in brief the story of the novel ‘Mayor of
Casterbridge’ written by Thomas Hardy.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Or
		Who is the author of ‘Mayor of Casterbridge’ ?
Give a brief picture of the story.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (69)]
Ans. Author of ‘Mayor of Casterbridge’ was Thomas
Hardy :
		Story :
(i) It is a story about Michael Henchard, a rich
grain merchant who becomes the Mayor of
Casterbridge.
(ii) He is independent-minded with his own business
style.
(iii) He was both unpredictably generous as well as
cruel with his employees.
(iv) He was no match for his manager and rival
Donald Farfare who runs business with
efficiency and is well-behaved and has good
temperament.
1+4=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 3. Summarize the main theme of the novel Oliver
Twist by Charles Dickens ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (BHTK)]
Ans. Main theme of Oliver Twist by Charles Dickens
encompasses a tale of a poor orphan who lived in a
world of petty criminals and beggars. He was finally
adopted by a wealthy man and lived happily.
		
This novel includes many genres. It is a novel that
talk about serious issues. It is a mystery story and
some chapters can even seem to belong to horror
fiction.
		
The novel emphasizes on the social injustices and
the political oppressions that the poor people
were subjected to in the England of 19th century.
		
Oliver Twist was the vehement protest against the
poor law of 1834. The main function of this law
was the punishment to the poor for being poor
and ensure that they never could rise out of their
poverty.

		
This novel is a ruthless satire. It effectively pierces
the middle class veil of complacency and snoberry
and reveals the hypocrises that plague society. 5
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 4. Describe the dark face of industrialization as
highlighted by Charles Dickens in his novels
‘Hard Times’ and ‘Oliver Twist’.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (47)]
Or
		How did Charles Dickens highlight the dark
aspects of industrialization in his novels ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (62), 2010 (B2)]
Ans. (i) Charles Dickens wrote about the industrial
labourers in big cities in his novel ‘Hard Times’.
(ii) His novels discussed the terrible effects of
industrialization on people’s lives and character in
the fictitious town of Coketown.
(iii) The town was full of machinery, smoking chimneys,
polluted rivers and people known as ‘hands’.
(iv) He criticized the greed of profit which had reduced
humans into instruments who were used for
production.
(v) His novel ‘Oliver Twist’ focussed on the terrible
conditions of life under capitalism. Oliver lived in
the world of petty criminals and beggars and was
brought up in a cruel work house.
1×5=5
Q. 4. What were the issues addressed by Thomas Hardy
in his novel ‘Mayor of Casterbridge’ ? How did
the novel bring together many cultures ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
Ans. (i) Issues :
		
(a) The time in which Thomas Hardy wrote this
novel was a time when large farmers fenced
off land, bought machines and employed
labourers.
		
(b) The old rural culture with independent
farmers was dying.
		
(c) In his novel, Hardy mourns the loss of the
personalised world.
		
(d) He also highlights the advantages and
disadvantages of the new order. (Any three)
(ii) The novel uses Vernacular language spoken by
different groups of people. This created the sense
of a shared world between diverse people in a
nation.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3+2=5

TOPIC-2

Emergence of the Novel in India
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which novel written in Bengali in 1956 describe
the community life of the fisher-folks in detail ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]

1 mark each

Ans.		Titash Ekti Nadir Naam.
1
		
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015)

56 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 2. Which major themes were taken up by the women
in their novels ?
[Board Term 1, 2016, Set-XOKG25B]
Ans. Love and romance.
Q. 3. Which Hindi novel by Premchand does tell the
story of Indian peasantry through the characters
of Hori and his wife Dhania ?
			 [Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC), (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. Godan.
1
Q. 4. In which language did Vaikam Mohammad
Basheer gained popularity as novelists ?
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Malayalam.
1
Q. 5. Whose poor condition has been dealt with in the
novel Sewasadan ?
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. The poor condition of women in society.
1
Q. 6. Name the first novel written by Bankim Chandra
Chattopadhyay.
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. Durgeshnandini.
1
Q. 7. The novel ‘Indulekha’ was published in which
year ?
Ans. 1889.
1
Q. 8. Identify the novel which was written by Baba
Padmanji, which used a simple style of story
telling to speak about the plight of widows.

Ans.
Yamuna Paryatan.
1
Q. 9.
Name any one novel written by Premchand.
Ans.
Godan.
1
Q. 10.
Who is considered the pioneer of modern Hindi
literature ?
Ans.
Bhartendu Harishchandra.
1
Q. 11.
Who was the author of the novel ‘Anandmatha’ ?
Ans.
Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyaya.
1
Q. 12.
Who wrote the novel Sultana’s Dream ?
Ans.
Rokeya Hossein.
1
Q. 13.
What was the title of the first modern novel
published in Malayalam ?
Ans.
Indulekha.
1
Q. 14.
Who published earliest Marathi Novel ‘Yamuna
Paryatan’ ?
Ans.
Baba Padamanji.
1
Q. 15.
Which novels has contributed immensely in
popularising the Hindi Language ?
Ans.
Chandrakanta.
1
Q. 16.
Who wrote Indulekha ?
Ans.
Chandu Menon.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. In what ways were the novels in colonial India
useful for both the colonizers as well as the
nationalists ? [Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) Colonial administrators found vernacular
novels a valuable source of information about
native life and customs.
(ii) New novels had descriptions about domestic
life, people's dress, their religious worship, their
beliefs and practices.
(iii) Indians used novels as a medium to criticise the
defects in their society and suggest remedies.
(v) Through glorified account of the past, these
novels helped in creating a sene of national pride
among their readers.
(Any three points)
		
		 (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 2. Who wrote the novel ‘Saraswativijayam’ ?
Highlight any two messages given to the people
through the novel ?
Ans. Potheri : Kunjambu wrote Saraswativijayam in
1892.
		
The messages which the world got after reading
this novel was :
(i) Caste should be done away in the society.
(ii) The book stresses the importance of education,
maths, etc.
1+2
Q. 3. How did the historical novels in India try to create
a sense of Pan-Indian belonging ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		Analyse any three reasons for making the novels
popular in India.
[DDE-2015, Set-M]
3 marks each
Ans. (i) In Bengal many historical novels were about
Marathas and Rajputs which produced a sense of
a Pan-Indian belonging.
(ii) They imagined the nation to be a full of adventure,
heroism, romance and sacrifice.
(iii) The imagined nation of the novel was so powerful
that it could inspire actual political movements.
1×3=3
Q. 4. Describe the growth of Hindi novels from their
origin to the period of excellence.
				[Board Term 1, School of Yavatmal, 2015, 2015,
2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		Explain briefly the history of Hindi Novel from
starting to excellence.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 15, 35)]
Ans. (i) Bhartendu Harishchandra was the pioneer
of modern Hindi literature but the first proper
modern novel was written by Srinivas Das of Delhi.
(ii) The writings of Devkinandan Khatri created a
novel with reading public in Hindi.
(iii) It was the writing of Premchand that the Hindi
novel achieved excellence.
1×3=3
Q. 5. How were the concerns of Oriyan Society depicted
in the Oriyan novels of 19th century ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOKG25B]
Ans. (i) The Oriya novel ‘Chaa Mana Atha Guntha’
written by noted novelist Fakir Mohan Senapati
dealt with the question of land and its possession.

[ 57

NOVELS, SOCIETY AND HISTORY

(ii) This path breaking work showed that the novel
could make the rural issues an important part of
urban preoccupations.
1½ + 1½ = 3
Q. 6. Describe any three special features of novels
written by the Malayalam writers Vaikkom
Muhammad Bashir.
[DDE-2015, Set-M]
[Board Term 1, 2012 (48)]
Ans. (i) Vaikkom Muhammad Bashir, a noted
Malayalam novelist represented the underprivileged class.
(ii) He had little education and most of his writing
was based on rich personal experience.
(iii) His novels and short stories were written in
ordinary language with humour.
(iv) He wrote about Muslim households in great details
and touched upon unconventional topics like
poverty, insanity and life in prison. (Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 7. Highlight any three contributions of novel to
modern society.
			

[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (WQ7FXWC)]

Ans. (i) Over the course of its history in both the west
and in India, the novel became part of the lives of
different sections of people.
(ii) Developments in print technologies helped to
make it popular all over the world.
(iii) Novels successfully produced a sense of
sharing and promote an understanding of
different people, different values and different
communities.
1×3=3
Q. 8. Explain the issues raised by the Malayalam novel
‘Indulekha’.
			 [Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. (i) Indulekha concerned the marriage practices
of upper-caste Hindus in Kerala, especially the
Nambuthiri Brahmins and the Nayars.
(ii) It raised the issue of education and human values.
(iii) The novel also described that the new young
generation wanted new laws regarding marriage
and property.
1×3=3
Q. 9. Name the first Hindi Modern novel which became
a best seller. State reasons for its popularity.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (DDE) (KVS)]
Or
		 Name the first Hindi Modern novel which became
the best seller. Mention its main features.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (72)]
Ans. Chandrakanta, written by Devaki Nandan Khatri
became the best seller.
		It became popular because :
		
Refer to Q. 19., Short Answer Type Questions.		
		
1×3=3
Q. 10. Explain the contribution of Premchand in the
field of novel writing.
		[Board Term 1, 2012 (53), 2011 (5800 12, 17, 18, 30,
		
37, 42, 44)]

Ans. Premchand’s novels are filled with all kinds of
powerful characters drawn from all levels of
society.
(i) His novels include characters such as aristocrats
and landlords, middle level peasants and landless
labourers, etc. The women characters are strong
individuals.
(ii) Drawn from various strata of society, his characters
create a community based on democratic values.
The central character of his novel ‘Rangbhoomi’,
Surdas is a visually impaired beggar from a socalled ‘untouchable’ caste.
(iii) Godan, Premchand’s best known work is an epic
of Indian peasantry.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 11. What are the main features of novel ‘Sevasadan’
written by Munshi Premchand ? Mention any
three.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans. (i) Sewasadan deals with poor conditions of
women in the society, child marriage and dowry.
(ii) It tells us about Indian upper class and the
opportunities they got from British government.
(iii) The novel was a shift from fantasy to a serious
reflection of life.
1×3=3
Q. 12. How do novels connect people of common
interests ? Who formed the readerships for novels
in Europe from 17th century onwards.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Ans. (i) Novels connect people of common interest in
the following ways :
		
(a) Novels created a common interest among
scattered and varied readers.
		
(b) Readers were drawn into their stories and
could identify with the life of fictitious
characters.
		
(c) They could discuss issues such as relationship
between love and marriage, proper conduct
for men and women.
(Any two)
(ii) New group of people as shopkeeper, clerk along
with the aristocrats in England and France formed
the new readership.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2+1=3
Q. 13. How does ‘Saraswativijayam’ lays stress upon the
importance of education for the upliftment of the
lower castes ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (63)]
Ans. (i) ‘Saraswativijayam’ shows a young man from
an ‘untouchable’ caste who leaves his village to
escape the cruelty of his Brahmin landlords.
(ii) He converts to Christianity, attains higher
education and returns as a judge in the local
court.
(iii) After revealing his true identity, he successfully
reforms his village.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 14. “The novel created space for minorities in the
society”. Establish the validity of the statement
with the help of an example.
				

[Board Term 1, 2012 (65)]

58 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. The novels created space for the minorities in the
society which may be seen from the facts given
below :
(i) Vaikkom Muhammad Basheer who was one of
the early Muslim writers gained wide popularity
as a Malayalam novelist.
(ii) Vaikkom wrote about the lives of Muslim
households.
(iii) He brought themes like poverty, insanity and
life in prison - the sufferings of the so called
‘minorities’ in the society into light.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 15. Who wrote the novel ‘Pariksha Guru’ ? Explain
any two features of it. [Board Term 1, 2012 (49)]
Ans. Srinivas Das wrote the novel 'Pariksha Guru'.
Features :
(i) It reflects the inner and outer world of the newly
emerged middle classes.
(ii) It reflects the difficulty faced by characters in
adopting the colonised society.
(iii) The novel tries to teach the right way to live and
remain rooted in traditional values.
(iv) The young are urged to cultivate the ‘health habit’
of reading newspapers.
(Any two)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Q. 16. How was the problem of being modern without
losing one’s identity was solved by the main
character of Indulekha ?
				

[Board Term 1, 2013 (BHTK)]

Ans. (i) The author of Malayalam novel Indulekha
portrayed his protagonists Indulekha and
Madhavan as English educated, smart, intelligent
young people who had good knowledge of
Sanskrit too.
(ii) The hero of the novel completed his education
from the university of Madras in English. He
used to dress in western clothing and also sported
a lift of hair as per the customers of his Nayar
community.
These characters portrayed many aspects of
traditional upbringing and modern education to
strike the right balance.
(iii) The characters had the fear of losing their identity
due to English education. So they used to held
onto their cultural tradition in various forms.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 17. Name the first novel written by Bankim Chandra
Chattopadhyaya. Explain his contribution to the
Bengali novel.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (71)]
Ans. ‘Durgeshnandini’
(i) He would host a Jatra in the courtyard where
members of family would be gathered.
(ii) In his room a group of literary friends would collect
to read, discuss and judge.
1+2=3

Q. 18. Examine the history of the growth of novels of
South India.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Ans. (i) Novels began appearing in South Indian
languages during colonial rule.
(ii) O. Chandu Menon wrote ‘Indulekha’, the first
modern novel in Malayalam.
(iii) Kandukuri Virisalingam translated Oliver
Goldsmith’s Vicar of Wakefield into Telugu. He
wrote a novel called ‘Rajasekhara Caritamu’.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 19. How did the writings of Devaki Nandan Khatri
create a novel reading public in Hindi ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 20, 21, 33)]
Ans. (i) His novel ‘Chandrakanta’ was a romantic novel
with dazzling elements of fantasy.
(ii) It got immensely popularized as it had Hindi
language and the Nagari script.
(iii) Written for the ‘pleasure of reading’ it gave insight
into the fears and desires of the readers.
1×3=3
Q. 20. How did novels inspire the freedom fighters ?
Explain with two examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 15, 29, 49)]
Ans. The novels developed the thinking process of the
colonial government regarding Indian customs and
culture and provided a solution and highlighted
the reality regarding Indian customs and cultures
that inspired the freedom fighter.
(i) In Bengal, many historical novels were written
about Marathas and Rajputs. These novels
produced a sense of pan-Indian belonging.
(ii) Anguriya Binimoy also inspired the freedom
fighters with the theme of Anandmath.
1+2=3
Q. 21. ‘Several early Hindi novels carried a clear message
of social reform.’ Give three examples in support
of this statement. [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 21)]
Ans. (i) Novels written by Dhanpat Rai or Prem Chand
were the clear picture of the reforms.
(ii) In the Kannad novel, Indirabai the heroine is given
away in marriage very early but her husband dies
soon leaving her to struggle on her own against
poverty and face indignities. Indirabai continues
her education, remarries and this time gets a
progressive, English educated man.
(iii) Indulekha—shows the discrimination in caste
hierarchy.
(iv) Potheri Kunjambu’s novel ‘Saraswativijayam’ was
an attack on caste oppression. (Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 22. Explain the contribution of women novelist in the
field of novels in India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 23)]
Ans. (i) In the earlier stages women began to write
stories, poems etc.
(ii) Their writings allowed for a new conception of
womenhood.
(iii) Stories of love showed women who could choose
or refuse their partners and relationships.
(iv) Some women authors wrote about the women
who changed the world of both men and women.
(Any three) 1×3=3

NOVELS, SOCIETY AND HISTORY

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. “Indian novelists in the 19th century wrote for
a national cause.” Justify the statement with
examples.
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		How did novels in India attempt to create a sense
of Pan-Indian belonging ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) In Bengal many historical novels were about
Marathas and Rajputs which produced a sense of
a Pan-Indian belonging.
(ii) They imagined the nation to be full of adventure,
heroism, romance and sacrifice.
(iii) Bhudeb Mukhopadhyay’s Anguriya Binimoy
(1857) was the first historical novel written in
Bengal whose hero Shivaji engaged in many battles
against a clever and treacherous Aurangzeb.
(iv) The imagined nation of the novel was so powerful
that it could inspire actual political movements.
(v) Bankim’s Anandmath is a novel about a secret
Hindu armed force that fight Muslims to establish
a Hindu Kingdom.
(vi) It was a novel that inspired freedom fighters.
(vii) The novel helped in popularising the sense of
belonging to a common nation. (Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 2. “Premchand’s novels are filled with all kinds of
powerful characters from all levels of society.”
Support the statement by giving suitable
examples.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		Explain the aspects of Premchand’s writings that
make them special.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]
Or
		Describe any five main features of novels written
by Munshi Premchand. [Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Or
		Premchand’s novels were filled with powerful
characters drawn from all levels of society.
Support the statement with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38), 2010 (C1)]
Or
		Explain the aspects of Premchand’s writings that
make them special.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JNEVD]
Ans. (i) Munshi Premchand drew tradition of Kissagoi
storytelling. His novels are filled with all kinds
of powerful characters, drawn from all levels of
society.
(ii) His novels include characters such as aristocrats
and landlords, middle level peasants and landless
labourers and women from margins of society.
He focussed on social issues like child marriage,
dowry, suppression of downtrodden classes by
landlords.

[ 59
5 marks each
(iii) The women characters are strong individuals
coming from lower classes and are not
modernized.
(iv) His novels look towards the future without
forgetting the importance of the past.
(v) Drawn from various strata of society, his characters
create a community based in democratic values.
Examples :
(i) His novel ‘Rangbhoomi’ about Surdas makes
the lives of the most oppressed section of society
worthy of literacy reflection.
(ii) ‘Godan’, his literary work is an epic on Indian
peasantry through the story of Haria and
Dhania. (CBES Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 3. What reasons led to the writing of ‘Indulekha’ by
Chandu Menon.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. (i) ‘Indulekha’ was concerned the marriage
practices of upper caste Hindus in Kerala, especially
the Nambuthiri Brahmins and the Nayars.
(ii) Nambuthiris were also major landlords in Kerala
at that time; and a large section of the Nayars were
their tenants.
(iii) In late-19th century Kerala, a younger generation
of English-educated Nayar men who had acquired
property and wealth on their own, began arguing
strongly against Nambuthiri alliances with Nayar
women.
(iv) They wanted new laws regarding marriage and
property.
(v) The story of Indulekha is interesting in the light of
their debates.
(vi) Chandu Menon clearly wanted his readers
to appreciate the new values and criticise the
ignorance and immorality.
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 4. Analyse the role and involvement of women in
the readership and authorship of novels in India.
		 [Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (X30T4XE)]
Ans. (i) In the early decades of the 20th century, women
in South India began writing novels and short
stories.
(ii) A reason for the popularity of novels among
women was that it allowed for a new conception of
womanhood.
(iii) Some women authors also wrote about women
who changed the world of both men and women.
(iv) Rokeya Hossein wrote a satiric fantasy in English
called Sultana’s Dream (1905) which shows a
topsy-turvy world in which women take the place
of men.
(v) Hunnah Mullens, a Christian missionary and the
author of ‘Karuna O Phulmonir Bibaran’ (1852),
wrote the first novel in Bengali, which tells her
readers that she wrote in secret.
1×5=5

60 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 5. The early novelists in India played a significant
role in spreading social awareness. Justify the
statement with examples.
				

[Board Term 1, 2013 (553K)]

Ans. (i) The novelists played an important role in
spreading social awareness by taking themes
such as caste oppression life of the common
people, marriage, practices, etc.
(ii) They tried to create social awareness on the
prevalence of backward social customs which
were exploitative in nature.
(iii) As early as 1857, Baba Padamanji’s Yamuna
Paryatan, used a simple style of storytelling to
speak about the plight of widows.
In Sevasadan, Premchand deals mainly with the
poor condition of women in societies. Issues like
child marriage and dowry are woven into the
story of the novel. Social evils like caste oppression
was highlighted by Potheri Kunjambu a lower
caste writer from North Kerala who wrote a
novel called Saraswativijayam in 1892, mounting
a strong attack on caste oppression. This man
shows a young man from an untouchable
caste leaving his village to escape cruelty of his
Brahmin landlord. He converts to Christianity,
obtains modern education and leads a respectable
life with his family.
(iv) Hence issues like plight of widows, problems
created by the early marriage of the girls and
caste oppression were the important social issues
which were highlighted through novels.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 5
Q. 6. Summarise the main theme of the novel Godan
written by Premchand.[Board Term 1, 2013 (553K)]
Ans. The novel Godan by Premchand was published
in 1936. It has been revered as one of the greatest
Hindi novels of the Indian literature. The main
theme of Godan was based on Indian peasantry.
		
The theme includes :
(i) socio-economic deprivation.
(ii) exploitation of rural people.
(iii) caste segregation.
(iv) varied concept of dharma as held by different
people.
(v) impact of industrialization on the various sections
of Indian community.
(vi) condition of women in society, child marriage
and dowry.
Godan is an epic of Indian peasant Hari and his
wife Dhania who were cheated by the landlords,
moneylenders, priests and colonial bureaucrates.
They formed a network of oppression, robbed their
land and converted them to landless labourers. At
the end, the couple died with dignity.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 5
Q. 7. Describe the appearing of novels in South India
during the period of colonial rule.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (BHTK)]

Ans. Some early English novels were translated into the
Indian language, but soon it was realized that the
readers are unfamiliar with the English culture of
characters in the novel, for instance, their clothes,
style of speaking language, manners. So novels
were written in Malayalam in the manner of
English novel books.
		
A few early novels were translation of English
novels into Indian languages. Later many writers
like Chandu Menon and others started to write
novels in their own language. Chandu Menon,
a subjudge from Malabar tried to translate an
English novel called Henrietta Temple written by
Benjamin Disraeli into Malayalam, but he realized
that his readers in Kerala were not familiar with
		
the characters of English novels and so he gave
up this idea and wrote a story in Malayalam in
the manner of English novel books. This novel
was called Indulekha. It was published in 1889
and was the first modern novel in Malayalam.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 5
Q. 8. Describe the main features of the novel ‘Pariksha
Guru’, written by Srinivas Das ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
Or
		How does the novel ‘Pariksha Guru’ reflect the
inner and outer world of the newly emerging
middle classes ? Explain. [Board Term 1, 2012 (59)]
Or
		In what ways did novels help to give the people
a vision of being ideal characters without losing
one’s identity ? Explain. [Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]
Or
		Who is the author of ‘Pariksha Guru’ ? What
message does he try to convey to the readers
through ‘Pariksha guru’ ? Describe.
		[Board Term 1, 2012 (65), 2011 (5800 23), 2010 (C2)]
Ans. The novels helped to give people a vision of being
ideal characters without losing one’s identity in
the following ways :
(i) Srinivas Das ‘Pariksha Guru’ reflects the inner
and outer world of the newly emerging middle
class.
(ii) The characters in the novel are caught in the
difficulty of adapting to colonial modernity and
preserving their cultural identity.
(iii) The characters in the novel attempt to bridge
two different worlds through their actions. They
take to new agricultural technology, modernise
trading practices, change the use of Indian
languages making them capable of transmitting
both western sciences and Indian wisdom.
(iv) The young are urged to cultivate the healthy
habit of reading the newspaper.
(v) The novel also emphasises that all aspects must
be achieved without sacrificing the traditional
values of the middle class household.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+5=5

[ 61

NOVELS, SOCIETY AND HISTORY

Q. 9. Who is the author of novel ‘Titash Ekti Nadir
Naam’ ? Why is it considered a special novel ?
Explain any four reasons.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37), 2010 (B2)]
Ans. (i) Author of this novel is ‘Advaita Malla Burman’.
(ii) It is considered a special novel because :
		
(a) This book is an epic about the Mallas, a
community of fish folk in the river Titash.
		
(b) The novel is about three generations of the
Mallas.
		
(c) It describes the community life of Mallas, their
religious tradition, festivals and relationship.
		
(d) Slowly they break up. Their end comes
together, as the river dries up.
		
(e) This is special because the author is himself
from a low caste fisher folk community.
				
(Any four)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5
Q. 10. Who was Vaikkom Muhammad Basheer ? Explain
how most of his works were based on his own rich
personal experience.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		Explain the contribution of Vaikkom Muhammad
Basheer to Malayalam writing.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 31)]
Ans. Vaikkom Muhammad Basheer was one of the
early Muslim writers to gain wide renown as a
novelist in malayalam. Basheer had little formal
education.
(i) Most of his works were based on his own rich
personal experience rather than on books from
the past.
(ii) His novels were written in ordinary language of
conservation.
(iii) His books were full of wonderful humour.
(iv) His novels spoke about details from the everyday
life of Muslim households.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5
Q. 11. Who translated the novel ‘Henrietta Temple’
in Malayalam ? Why did he give up the idea of
translating more English novels in Vernacular
languages ? What did he decide to do instead ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34, 48, 62)]
Ans. (i) Chandu Menon from Malabar had translated
the novel.
(ii) He realied that his readers in Kerala were not
familiar with the way in which characters in
English society lived. The direct translation of
English novels was dreadfully boring and the
Indian readers could not relate to the cultural or
social context mentioned in the novels.
(iii) He wrote ‘Indulekha’, the first modern novel in
Malayalam in the manner of an English novel.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+3+1=5
Q. 12. In what way did the colonisers and nationalists
use novels as an effective instrument for the
attainment of their goals ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]

Or
		
“Novels were useful for both the colonial
administrators and Indian nationalists”. Support
the statement with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (39)]
Or
		“Novels were useful to different sections of the
society.” Support your answer with suitable
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (53)]
Ans. (i) Colonial administrators found ‘Vernacular
novels’ a valuable source of information on native
life and customs, i.e., :
		
(a) how people were dressed
		
(b) their religious worship
		
(c) beliefs and practices
		
(d) about domestic life
		
Such information was valuable to them in
order to govern the Indian society which had
a wide cultural variety. The novels had the
domestic life well-described which helped
the British administrators to understand the
beliefs and practices.
(ii) The nationalists used novels as a powerful
medium to criticize the defects of the society and
suggested remedies. Many novels established
links with the past. Glorified account of the past
created a sense of material pride. Novels created
a feeling of collective belongingness among the
people from different walks of life speaking the
same language..
Example : Virasalingam.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2½+2½=5
Q. 13. How did the colonial administrators find
Vernacular novels as a valuable source of
information to native life and customs ? Explain
with examples.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (80)]
Ans. (i) Colonial administrators found Vernacular
novels to be a valuable available source of
information on native life and customs.
(ii) As outsiders, the British knew little about life
inside Indian households.
(iii) Novels helped the colonists understand Indian
way of dressing, forms of worship, their beliefs
and practices.
(iv) Many novels reflected social customs, divisions
based on caste and class.
(v) These novels helped the British understand the
social divisions and used them to their advantage
to create further divisions. Lord Bentinck helped
the Indian reformers in their mission to get rid
of the practices like ‘Sati’ and passed legislation
favouring remarriage of widows.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 14. How did authors from so called ‘low castes’ gain
recognition in the world of literature ? Explain
with examples of any two such authors.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]

62 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. (i) Pother Kunjambu, a lower caste writer,
wrote ‘Saraswati Vijayam’ a novel portraying an
untouchable boy who converts to Christianity.
This novel stressed on importance of education in
upliftment of lower castes.
(ii) Advaita Mallah Burman belonging to community
of fisher folks wrote ‘Titash Ekti Nadir Naam’.
This novel talks about lives of Mallah family.
(iii) Vaikkom Basheer a Malayalam novelist also
wrote about underprivileged classes and Muslim
households in general.
(Any two)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2½+2½=5
Q. 15. How the caste issue was included in novels
in India ? Support your answer with suitable
examples.
		[Board Term 1, 2012 (51), 2011 (5800 17, 29, 38, 44)]

Ans. (i) Indulekha : It a hotly debated novel and the
concern it addresses are of marriage practices of
upper class Hindus in Kerala.
(ii) Potheri Kunjambu a ‘lower caste’ writer from
North Kerala wrote ‘Saraswativijayam’ and
attacked caste oppression.
(iii) Titash Ekti Nadir Naam : It was based on the
fisher folk community.
(iv) Basheer was a Muslim writer with little formal
education.
(v) Premchand’s ‘Ranghoomi’ : The hero of this
novel is a low caste whose land has forcibly been
taken away.
(vi) ‘Godan’ : It is a story about Indian peasantry and
how they are exploited.
(Any five)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5



UNIT – II

Contemporary
India-II

SYLLABUS

1

CHAPTER

RESOURCES
AND
DEVELOPMENT

¾¾ Resources : Types-natural and human; need for resource planning.
¾¾ Natural Resources : land as a resource; soil types and distribution; changing land-use pattern : land
degradation and conservation measures.

QUICK REVIEW
Everything available in our environment which can be used
TOPIC - 1
to satisfy our needs, provided it’s technologically accessible,
Resources : Natural and Human .... P. 66
economically feasible and culturally acceptable can be
termed as ‘Resource’.
TOPIC - 2
zz Resources can be classified in the following ways :
Land as a Resource .... P. 68
(a) On the basis of origin :
		
(i) Biotic 		 (ii) Abiotic
(b) On the basis of exhaustibility :
		
(i) Renewable 		 (ii) Non-renewable
(c) On the basis of ownership :
		
(i) Individual 		 (iii) Community
		
(ii) National		 (iv) International
(d) On the basis of status of development :
		
(i) Potential 		 (iii) Developed
		
(ii) Stock 		 (iv) Reserves
zz Resources are compulsory for human survival as well as for maintaining the quality of life.
zz Human beings use resources indiscriminately and this has led to global ecological crises such as global
warming, ozone layer depletion, environmental pollution and land degradation.
zz Development of Resources : Resources are vital for human survival. It was believed that resources are
free gifts of nature. As a result man used them indiscriminately which led to the following problems :
(i) Depletion of resources.
(ii) Accumulation of resources in a few hands.
(iii) Indiscriminate exploitation of resources.
*
For a sustained quality of life and global peace it is essential that resources should be distributed
equally.
*
Sustainable economic development means development should take place without damaging the
environment and development in the present should not compromise with the needs of the future
generation.
zz Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 1992
In June 1992, for achieving sustainable development in the 21st century, more than 100 states participated
in the First International Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil. The main focus of this summit was to
protect environment and socio economic development at the global level. The leaders of the states signed
the Declaration on Global Climate Change and Biological Diversity.
Agenda 21 : It has been signed by world leaders at the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED). The aim of this agenda is to achieve global sustainable development by combating environmental damage, poverty and disease through global co-operation on common interests, mutual needs and shared responsibilities. The major objective of this agenda is that every local government
has the power to draw its own local Agenda 21.

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz

64 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

zzResource-Planning in India
		
Resource planning involves the following steps :
(i) Identification and inventory of resources, which involves surveying, mapping and quantitative as well as
qualitative estimation and measurement of resources.
(ii) For implementing resource development plans, evolve a planning structure with appropriate technology, skill
and institutional set up.
(iii) Match resource development plan with overall national development plans.
zzIndia has 43% plain land, 30% mountain region, 27% pleateau region.
zzLand resources are used for the following purpose :
(i) Forests
(ii) Land not available for cultivation.
(iii) Other uncultivated land (excluding fallowland)
(iv) Fallow land
(v) Net sown area
zzThe total geographical area of India is 3, 28 million sq km. Land use data, however is available only for 93% of the
total geographical area.
zzAt present there are about 130 million hectares of degraded land in India of which 28% belong to the forest, 56% is
water eroded and the rest is affected by saline and alkaline deposits.
zzFactors causing land degradation
(i) Deforestation,
(ii) Overgrazing,
(iii) Mining and quarrying,
(iv) Over irrigation making land saline and alkaline,
(v) Dust generated from cement ceramic industry,
(vi) Industrial effluents.
zzSuggestions for conservation of land
(i) Afforestation,
(ii) Proper management of grazing,
(iii) Shelter belts of plants,
(iv) Stabilization of sand dunes by planting thorny bushes,
(v) Proper management of wasteland,
(vi) Control on mining,
(vii) Discharge of industrial effluents and wastes after treatment.
zzClassification of Soils
(i) Alluvial soil :
		 (a) Widely spread in north Indian plains.
		 (b) Classified as khadar (new alluvial) and bangar (old alluvial).
		 (c) Adequate proportion of potash, phosphoric acid and lime.
		 (d) Ideal for sugarcane, paddy, wheat and other cereal and pulse crops.
(ii) Black soil :
		 (a) Also called regur soil.
		 (b) Ideal for cotton.
		 (c) Present in Maharashtra, Saurashtra, Malwa, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.
		 (d) Rich in soil nutrients, such as calcium carbonate, magnesium, potash and lime, but poor in phosphorus
content.
(iii) Red and yellow soil :
		 (a) Developed in areas of low rainfall or crystalline igneous rocks.
		 (b) Found in Odisha, Chhattisgarh and the piedmont zone of Western Ghats.
		 (c) Due to diffusion of iron in crystalline and metamorphic rocks, its colour becomes reddish.
(iv) Laterite soil :
		 (a) Develops in areas of high temperature and rainfall.
		 (b) Humus content is low.
		 (c) Mainly found in Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and hilly areas of Assam and Odisha.
		 (d) Good for tea, coffee, cashew nuts, etc.
(v) Arid soil :
		 (a) Sandy in texture and saline in nature.
		 (b) Lacks in humus and moisture.
		 (c) Found in western Rajasthan.

RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT

[ 65

(vi) Forest soil :
		 (a) Found in hilly and mountainous regions.
		 (b) Loamy and silty in valley sides, while coarse grained in the upper slopes.
zzSoil Erosion :
		 (a) The denundation of top soil cover by agents of nature, e.g. wind, water and air is called soil erosion.
		 (b) Human activities responsible for soil erosion are deforestation, overgrazing, construction and mining, etc.
zzMeasures for soil conservation :
(i) Contour ploughing.
(ii) Terrace farming.
(iii) Strip cropping.
(iv) Shelter belts of trees.

KNOW THE TERMS
zzResources

: All the useful elements of environment that satisfy our basic needs are called resources.

zzBiotic Resources : These are obtained from biosphere and have life such as human beings, flora and fauna, fisheries,

livestock etc.
Resources : Resources that comprise non-living things, such as rocks, minerals etc.
zzRenewable Resources : The resources which can be used again and again and can be reproduced by physical,
chemical or mechanical processes are known as renewable or replenishable resources. For example : solar and wind
energy.
zzNon-renewable Resources : These are the resources that once used, can’t be reproduced or replenished. For
example : fossil fuels, minerals like copper and iron ore.
zzNatural Resources : Natural endowments in the form of land, water, vegetation and minerals are called natural
resources. These are free gifts of nature.
zzMan-made Resources : These are the resources that are created by human beings with the help of machines.
zzIndividual Resources : The resources owned privately by individuals.
zzCommunity-owned Resources : Resources which are accessible to all the members of the community.
zzNational Resources : All the resources which are present in the political boundary of a nation up to 12 nautical
miles in the ocean from the coast.
zzInternational Resources : The resources that do not belong to any individual country.
zzPotential Resources : Resources which are available in a region, but have not been utilized.
zzDeveloped Resources : Resources which are surveyed and their quantity and quality have been determined for
utilization.
zzStock : Materials present in the environment which have the potential to satisfy human needs but human beings
do not have the appropriate technology to access these materials.
zzReserves : They are the subsets of the stock which can be put into use with the help of existing technology but their
use has not been started yet.
zzSustainable Development : It means development should take place without damaging the environment and
development in the present should not compromise with needs of the future generations.
zzResource Planning : It is the widely accepted strategy for judicious use of resources.
zzResource Conservation : Conservation of resources means the judicial and planned use of resources. Thus, we get
benefitted from them for long time.
zzGross Cropped Area : Area sown more than once in an agricultural year plus net sown area is known as gross
cropped area.
zzFallow Land : A land which is left without cultivation for one or less than one agricultural year for increasing its
fertility is known as the follow land.
zzWaste Land : Land which is not suitable for cultivation is known as waste land.
zzNet Sown Area : Area sown once in a year is known as the net sown area.
zzPasture : Grassland which is used for providing food for animals.
zzSoil Erosion : The removal of top fertile soil cover due to various reasons such as wind, glacier and water is called
soil erosion.
zzGullies : The running water cuts through the clayey soil and makes deep channels known as gullies.
zzSheet Erosion : When the top soil is washed away due to heavy flow of water down the slopes, it is known as sheet
erosion.
zzWind Erosion : When the top fertile soil blows off due to wind it is known as wind erosion.
zzAbiotic

66 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

zzStrip

Cropping : Large fields can be divided into strips. Strips of grass are left to grow between the crops. This
breaks up the force of the wind. This method is known as strip cropping.
zzContour Ploughing : Ploughing along the contour lines can slow down the flow of water down the slopes. This is
called contour ploughing.
zzShelter Belts : Planting lines of trees to create shelter breaks up the force of the wind. Rows of such trees are called
shelter belts.

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Meanings of Terms
		http://agricoop.nic.in/statistics/stexple.html
2. Types of soils
		http://www.winentrance.com/general_knowledge/geography/soils-india.html
3. Rio de Janerio Earth Summit, 1992 and Agenda 21
		http://www.worldsummit2002.org/index.htm?
		http://www.worldsummit2002.org/guide/unced.html
4. Actual photos of Soil Erosion
		http://www.fotosearch.com/photos_images/soil_erosion.html

FLOWCHART

TOPIC-1

Resources : Natural and Human
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Give examples of abiotic resources ?
Ans. Rocks and Metals.
1
Q. 2. In which type of energy is the state of Rajasthan
rich ?
Ans. Solar energy.
1

1 mark each

Q. 3. Which cold desert is relatively isolated from the
rest of the country ?
Ans. Ladakh.
1
Q. 4. What are resources which are found in a region
but have not been utilised called ?

[ 67

RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT

Ans. Potential resources.
1
Q. 5. Which resources are surveyed and determined
on the basis of their quantity and quality for
utilisation ?
Ans. Developed resources.
1

Q. 6. Which relief features of India has 30 percent of the
total surface area of country ?
Ans. Mountain.
1
Q. 7. Give examples of Biotic resources ?
Ans. Human beings, flora, fauna, fisheries, livestock,
etc.		
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Distinguish between stock and potential resource.
Give one example of each.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (62)]
Ans.		 Stock :
(a) They are found in the environment.
(b) They are not accessed due to the lack of
technology.
(c) Example : Water is a compound of two
inflammable gases – Hydrogen and Oxygen,
which can be used as a rich source of energy.
But we lack in the proper know-how of the
technology.
Potential resources :
(a) They are found in a region.
(b) They are not yet utilized or developed.
(c) Example : Rajasthan and Gujarat have enormous
potential for the development of wind and solar
energy but they are yet to be developed for
various reasons.
				 (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1½+1½=3
Q. 2. What are the three stages of resource planning in
India ?
[Board Term 1, 2012, 2011, (5800 17, 23,
		
35, 36, 50)]
Ans. (a) Identification and inventory of resources
across the regions of the country.
(b) Evolving a planning structure endowed with
appropriate technology, skill and institutional
set up for implementing resource development
plans.
(c) Match the resource development plans with
overall national development plans.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 3. What is meant by the term “resource”? List the
types of resources classified on the basis of its
ownership.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]
Ans. Resource : Everything available in our environment
which can be used to satisfy our needs, provided,
is technologically accessible, economically feasible
and culturally acceptable is known as a Resource.
		Types of resources on the basis of ownership
are : Individual , Community, National and International.
2+1=3
Q. 4. Distinguish between the renewable and non-

3 marks each
renewable resources.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (72)]
Or
		Explain the types of resources on the basis of
exhaustibility with the help of examples.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 18, 24, 40)]
Ans. (a) Renewable Resources : Resources which
can be renewed or reproduced by mechanical,
physical or chemical processes are known as
renewable or replenishable resources, e.g., solar
and wind energy, water, forests and wildlife etc.
(b) Non-Renewable Resources : These occur over
very long geological times. Minerals and fossil
fuels are examples of such resources. These
resources take millions of years in their formation.
Some of the resources like metals are recyclable
and some of them such as fossil fuels cannot be
recycled and get exhausted with their use.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2011) 1½+1½=3
Q. 5. Differentiate between Stock and Reserve stating
two points of difference.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 26)]
Ans. Stock : Materials which have the potential to
satisfy human beings but human do not have the
technology to access these, e.g., water which is a
compound of two inflammable gases—Hydrogen
and oxygen and can be a rich source of energy. We
do not know how to use them.
		Reserves : These are subset of the stock. They can
be put into use with existing know-how but their
use has not been started. e.g., River water is used as
a source of hydroelectricity but to a limited extent.
		
1½+1½=3
Q. 6. “India’s vast and diverse size is the most important
resource.” Support the statement.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 27)]
Ans. In India, there are regions which are rich in certain
types of resources but are deficient in some other
resources :
(a) Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh are
rich in minerals and coal deposits.
(b) Arunachal Pradesh has abundant water resources.
(c) Rajasthan is endowed with solar and wind
energy.
1×3=3

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. How can you contribute to minimize the pollution.
Explain.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. We can contribute to minimize the pollution by :
(i) Planting more plants and trees.

3-5 marks each
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Using non-conventional sources of energy such as
solar and wind energy.
Using public transport instead of personal car/
motor bike etc.
Saving water and electricity.
 (Any three) 1×3=3

68 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

HOTS Questions
Q. 1. Classify resources on the basis of exhaustibility.
Mention four features of each.		
		
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. On the basis of exhaustibility, there are two types
of resources :
(a) Renewable resources
(b) Non-renewable resources
(a) Renewable resources :
		
(i) They can be renewed or obtained even after
they are used.
		
(ii) They are not exhaustible due to constant use.
		
(iii) They are affected by external environment.
		
(iv) For example : solar and wind energy.
(b) Non-renewable resources :
		
(i) They can’t be reproduced once they are used.
		
(ii) They are exhaustible due to continuous use.
		
(iii) They are free from environmental effects.
		
(iv) For example : minerals and fossil fuels.		
1½+1½=3
Q. 2. Explain reasource planning. What are the steps
involved in resource planning ?
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		Why is resource planning essential in India ?		
		
[KVS]
Or
		What is resource planning ? Why is resource
planning essential ? Explain it with three reasons.
Ans. Resource planning is a technique or skill for proper
utilization of resources.
(a) As resources are limited, their planning is necessary
so that we can use them properly and also save
them for our future generations.
(b) Resources are not only limited but they are
distributed over different parts of the country.
(c) Resource planning is also essential for production
of resources and to protect them from over
exploitation.
1+4=5
Q. 3. Provide a suitable classification for resources on
the basis of ownership. Mention main features of
any three types of such resources.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]

3-5 marks each
Ans. Classification for resources on the basis of
ownership :
(i) Individual resources
(ii) Community owned resources
(iii) National resources
(iv) International resources
		(i) Individual Resources : Resources which
are privately owned against the payment of
revenue by individuals. e.g., ponds, pasture
lands etc.
		(ii) Community Owned Resources : Resources
which are accessible to all the members of a
community, e.g., picnic spots.
		(iii) National Resources : All the resources which
are present in the political boundaries of a
nation up to 12 nautical miles in the ocean
from the coast, termed as terrestrial water and
resources theirin belong to the nation.
(iv) International Resources : There are international institutions which regulate some
resource. The oceanic resources beyond 200
nautical miles of the Exclusive Economic
Zone belong to open ocean ocean and no
individual country can utilise theses without
the concurrence of international institutions. 3
Q. 4. ‘Indiscriminate use of resources had led to
numerous problems.’ Justify this statement.
		 [Board Term 1, KVS-2014, (WQ7FXWC) 2012,
		
2011 (5800 13, 19, 31, 33)]
Ans.		 Resources are vital for human survival and
it was believed that resources are free gift of
nature. The indiscriminate use of resources led
to the following problems :
(a) To satisfy the greed of few individuals, depletion
of resources were continued.
(b) Due to the accumulation of resources in few
hands, the society gets divided into two segments,
i.e., rich and poor.
(c) Indiscriminate use of resources led to ecological
crises, e.g., ozone layer depletion, land
degradation, global warming and environmental
pollution.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

TOPIC-2

Land as a Resource
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which regions of India have well developed
terrace farming ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans.		Western and central Himalayas
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2015) 1

1 mark each

Q. 2. Which soil types is made up of lava flows ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. Black soil.
1
Q. 3. In which states has mining caused severe land
degradation ?
Ans. Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and
Odisha.
1

[ 69

RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT

Q. 4. What is the percentage share of plains in the total
land area ?
Ans. 43%.
1
Q. 5. What is the main cause of land degradation in
Punjab ?
Ans. Over irrigation.
1
Q. 6. In which states is black soil found ?
Ans. Maharashtra, Saurashtra, Malwa, Madhya Pradesh
and Chhattisgarh.
1
Q. 7. Which soil is ideal for growing cotton ?
Ans. Regur soil.
1
Q. 8. In which states overgrazing is responsible for
land degradation ?
Ans. Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat and
Maharashtra.
1
Q. 9. Which soil is known as regur soil ?
Ans. Black soil.
1
Q. 10. In which states laterite soil is found ?
Ans. Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh,
and hilly areas of Odisha and Assam.
1
Q. 11. Which soil type is the result of intense leaching
due to heavy rainfall ?
Ans. Laterite soil.
1
Q. 12. Name the land with deep channels that is unfit for
cultivation.
Ans. Bad land.
1
Q. 13 ‘Laterite’ has been derived from which word and
what is its meaning ?
Ans. It has been derived from `Later’ a latin word which
means brick.
1
Q. 14. Which state has the largest area under black soil ?
Ans. Maharashtra.
1
Q. 15. What are the methods of checking soil erosion ?
Ans. Strip cropping, terrace farming and contour
ploughing.
1
Q. 16. Gully erosion is common in which basin ?
Ans. Chambal Basin.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. State any three physical factors as well as 3 human
factors which determine the use of land in India.		
[School of Scholars, Yavatmal, 2015]
Ans. (i) The use of land is determined by physical
factor’s such as to topography, climate, soil types.
(ii) It is also determined by human factors such as
population density, technological capability,
cultural and traditions etc.
1½ + 1½
Q. 2. Distinguish between red soil and laterite soil
stating any three points of distinction.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set- XOKG2SB]
Ans.
Red soil

Laterite soil

Red soils develop on
crystalline
igneous
rocks in areas of low
rainfall.

Laterite soils develop
in areas with high
temperature and heavy
rainfall.

Red soils are found in
parts of Odisha and
Chattisgarh. Southern
parts of the middle of
Ganga plain and along
the piedmont zone of
the (Western ghats).

Laterite soil is mainly
found in Karnataka,
Kerala and the hilly
areas of Odisha and
Assam.

Red and yellow soils In laterite soil, humus
develop a reddish content is very low.
colour due to diffusion
of iron in crystalline
and
metamorphic
rocks.
Q. 3. Which is the main cause of land degradation in
Gujarat, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh ? How
can it be checked ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]


3 marks each
Ans.		 Main Cause : Large scale overgrazing has caused
severe land degradation.
		Measures to check include :
(a) Afforestation and proper management of grazing.
(b) Planting of shelter belts of plants.
(c) Stabilization of sand dunes by growing thorny
bushes.
(d) Control on overgrazing.
1×3=3
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015)
Q. 4. Describe any three measures of controlling land
degradation.
[DDE-E, 2015 Set-E][Board Term 1, 2012 (39)]
Or
		 Explain any three steps taken to solve the problem
of land degradation in India.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 25)]
Ans. (a) Afforestation and proper management of
grazing can help to some extent.
(b) Planting of shelter belts, control on overgrazing,
stabilisation of sand dune by growing thorny
bushes are some of the methods to check land
degradation.
(c) Proper management of wastelands, control of
mixing activities, proper discharge and disposal
of industrial effluents and wastes after treatment
can reduce land and water degradation in
industrial and sub-urban areas.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2011) 1×3=3
Q. 5. Mention any three features of arid soils.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. (i) Arid soils range from red to brown in colour.
(ii) They are generally sandy in texture and saline in
nature.
(iii) Due to dry climate, high temperature, evaporation
is faster and the soil lacks humus and moisture.

70 ]
(iv)
Q. 6.
Ans.
(ii)
(iii)
Q. 8.

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

The lower horizons of the soil are occupied by
Kankar because of the increasing calcium content
downwards.
(Any three) 1×3=3
‘Land is a natural resource of utmost importance’.
Justify
the
statement
with
appropriate
arguments.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
(i) We live on land, we perform our economic
activities on land and we use it in different ways.
It supports natural vegetation, wildlife, human life,
economic activities, transport and communication
systems.
It is an asset of a finite magnitude.
1×3=3
Enumerate any three features of “regur” soil.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38), 2011 (5800 14, 20, 32, 38)]

Ans. (a) Regur soil is also known as black soil.
(b) It is ideal for growing cotton, so it is also known
as “black cotton soil”.
(c) It is made up of extremely fine clayey material.
(d) It is rich in soil nutrients, calcium carbonate,
magnesium, potash and lime.
(e) It develops cracks in hot weather.
(f) It can hold moisture and is sticky when wet.
(Any three)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 9. Which geographical factors are responsible for the
evolution of black soil? Why is it considered the
most suitable for growing cotton?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (56)]
Ans. (i) Climatic conditions along with present rock
material are important factors for making of black
soil. The parent rock is volcanic rock.
(ii) It is ideal for growing cotton because of the
following reasons :
		
(a) It has capacity to hold moisture.
		
(b) It is rich in soil nutrients such as calcium
carbonate and potash.
		
(c) Deep cracks in the soil help in aeration.
(Any two)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Q. 10. Distinguish between Khadar and Bangar soils ? 		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (63), 2011, (5800 16, 22, 34)]
Or
		How are alluvial soils formed ? How is Bangar
different from Khadar ?
Ans. Alluvial soil : It is soil formed by the sediments
deposited by river water.

(a)

Khadar soil

Bangar soil

It is a new alluvial
soil.

It is an old alluvial
soil.

(b)

Lower
concentration of
kankar nodules.

Higher
concentration of
kankar nodules.

(c)

It has more fine
particles.

It has less fine
particles.

(d) It is more fertile.
It is less fertile.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 11. Explain any three factors for soil formation. 		
		 [Board Term 1, 2012 (40), 2011 (5800 29, 43)]
Ans. (a) The parent rock is the first factor which
provides the basic material for the formation of
soil.
(b) Climate breaks the parent rock into small pieces.
(c) Vegetation : Plant and animal organisms help
in the weathering of the rocks slowly but
continuously.
(d) Various forces of nature such as change in
temperature, actions of running water, wind and
glaciers, activities of decomposers, etc. contribute
to the formation of soil.
(e) Chemical and organic changes take place in the
soil.
(Any three)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 12. Mention any two human activities which are
responsible for the process of soil erosion. Explain
the two types of soil erosion mostly observed in
India ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans.		 Two human activities which are responsible for
the process of soil erosion are deforestation and
overgrazing, mining, construction, etc. (Any two)
		Types of Soil Erosion :
(a) Gullies : The running water cuts through the
clayey soils and makes deep channels/gullies. The
unfit land caused by gullies is called bad land or
ravines.
(b) Sheet erosion : Water flows as a sheet over large
areas down a slope. The top soil is washed away.
This process is known as sheet erosion.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Q. 13. Define the following terms :
(a) Current fallow land
(b) Other than current fallow
(c) Culturable waste land [Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
Ans. (a) Current fallow land : Left uncultivation for
one or less than one agricultural year.
(b) Other than current fallow : Left uncultivated for
past 1 to 5 agricultural years.
(c) Cultural waste land : Left uncultivated for more
than 5 agricultural years.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3

5 marks each

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Describe any five distinct characteristics of ‘Arid
soils’.
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) Red to brown in colour.
(ii) Sandy in texture.

(iii)Evaporation is faster, soil lacks humus and moisture.
(iv) Soil occupied by Kankar.
(v) Kankar restricts the infiltration of water.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2015) 1 × 5 = 5

[ 71

RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT

Q. 2. Why is soil considered as a resource ? Explain
with five arguments.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. (i) Soil is considered as a resource because it is
used to satisfy our needs.
(ii) It is the most important renewable natural
resource.
(iii) It is the medium of plant growth.
(iv) It supports different types of living organisms on
the earth.
(v) It is the base of our life.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 5
Q. 3. Explain the two types of soil erosion mostly
observed in India. Explain three human activities
responsible for soil erosion.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 DDE Set-M]
Ans.		Types of Soil Erosion :
(a) Gullies : The running water cuts through the
clayey soils and makes deep channels/gullies. The
unfit land caused by gullies is called bad land or
ravines.
(b) Sheet erosion : Water flows as a sheet over large
areas down a slope. The top soil is washed away.
This process is known as sheet erosion.

Two human activities which are responsible for
the process of soil erosion are deforestation and
overgrazing, mining, construction, etc.
		
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1+2=3
Q. 4. What type of soil is found in the river deltas of the
eastern coast ? Give four main features of this type
of soil.
[NCERT]
Or
Describe alluvial soil under the following heads :
(a) Formation
(b) Distribution
(c) Nurients.
[Board Term 1, 2013 (3K)]
Ans. Alluvial soil is found in the entire northern plain It
is the most widely spread soil of India.
		Main features of alluvial soil :
(a) It is formed by the deposition of materials brought
down by the Himalayan rivers.
(b) It is highly fertile.
(c) It consists of various proportions of sand, silt and
clay.
(d) It is rich in potash, phosphoric acid and lime but
deficient in organic matter.
(e) It supports a large variety of crops like paddy and
sugarcane.
1+4=5 (Any four)

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. Explain any three human activities responsible
for land degradation in India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (05), 2012 (51)]
Or
		How are human activities responsible for the
degradation of land ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011, (5800 42)]
Ans. (a) Mining : Mining sites are abandoned after
excavation work is complete leaving deep scars in
states such as Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh and Odisha. Deforestation due to mining
has caused severe land degradation.
(b) Over irrigation : Over irrigation in the states of
Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh, has
caused water logging and increase in salinity of
soil.

3-5 mark each
(c)

Overgrazing : Overgrazing in states such as
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra is a huge cause due to cattle
population.

(d)

Industries : Mineral processing industry like
grinding of limestone for cement industry and
calcite and soapstone for ceramic industry
generate huge quantity of dust, this retards the
process of infiltration of water into the soil.

(e)

Industrial Waste : Industrial effluents also have
become a major source of land degradation.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)

HOTS Questions
Q. 1. Suggest any five measures to control land
degradation in India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. Measures to control land degradation in India :
(i) Afforestation
(ii) Proper management of grazing
(iii) Planting shelter belts of plants
(iv) Stabilization of sand dunes by planting thorny
bushes

3-5 marks each
(v)
(vi)
(vii)

Proper management of waste land
Control of mining
Proper discharge of industrial effluents and wastes
after treatment.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 2. Suggest any three methods of soil conservation
suitable to Indian conditions.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Or
		What steps can be taken to control soil erosion in
hilly areas?		
		 [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 15, 21, 30, 33, 44)]

72 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans.		 Methods of soil conservation :
(a)

Ploughing along the contour lines can decrease
the speed of water flow down the slopes.

(b)

Step or terrace cultivation on slopes restricts
erosion. Western and Central Himalayas have
well-developed terrace farming.

(c)

Strip cropping : Here large fields can be divided
into strips. Strips of grass are left to grow between
the crops. This breaks up the force of the wind.

(d)

Shelter Belt Plantation : Trees are planted
in rows. These shelter belts have led to the
stabilisation of sand dunes and in stabilising the
desert in western India.
(Any three)

				

Ans. India has land under a variety of relief features
namely; mountains, plateau, plains and islands.
(a) 43% Land is plain : provides facilities for agriculture
and industry.
(b) 30% Land is mountainous : provides facilities for
tourism and ecological aspects.
(c) Plateau (27%) : possesses rich reserves of minerals,
fossil fuels and forests.

(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3

Q. 3. What are the main advantages of India’s land
under a variety of relief features ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 37, 45)]

		
		

1×3=3



2

CHAPTER

FOREST AND
WILDLIFE
RESOURCES

¾¾ Types and distribution, depletion of flora and fauna ; conservation and protection of forests and
wildlife.

QUICK REVIEW
We share this planet (earth) with millions of other living
beings. This entire habitat that we live in has immense
TOPIC - 1
Bio Diversity Biological Diversity ...
biodiversity.
The Himalayan Yew in Trouble .... P. 75
zz Humans along with all living organisms form a complex
web of ecological system.
TOPIC - 2
zz Forests play a key role in the ecological system as these are
Conservation of Forest & Wildlife
also the primary producers on which all the other living
In India .... P. 77
beings depend.
zz India is one of the world’s richest countries in terms of its
vast array of biological diversity, and has about 8% of the
total number of species present in the world.
zz Over 81,000 species of fauna and 47,000 species of flora are found in India.
zz Factors for the depletion of flora and fauna :
(i)
Expansion of the railways, agriculture, commercial and scientific forestry and mining activities.
(ii) Deforestation due to shifting cultivation, a type of slash and burn agriculture.
(iii) Large scale development projects : Clearing of forests for Narmada Sagar Project in Madhya Pradesh.
(iv) Mining is another factor for deforestation.
(v) Grazing and fuel wood collection.
		
(vi) Habitat destruction, hunting, poaching, over exploitation, environmental pollution, poisoning and
forest fires are some of the factors which affect India’s biodiversity.
		 (vii) Environmental destruction is also caused due to unequal access, inequitable consumption of
resources and differential sharing of responsibility for environmental well-being.
(viii) Over population.
zz Conservation of forests and wildlife in India :
		
(a) Conservation is the preservation of ecological diversity and our life support system—soil, water and
air. It preserves the genetic diversity of animals and plants for better growth of species and breeding.
(b) For protecting habitat, the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act was implemented in 1972.
(c) Outcomes of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act are :
		
(i) An all India list of protected species was published.
		
(ii) Hunting of endangered species was banned and legal protection was given to their habitats.
		
(iii) Trade in wildlife was restricted.
		
(iv) Government established national parks and wildlife sanctuaries.
(d) Under the Wildlife Acts of 1980 and 1986, several butterflies, moths, beetles and a dragonfly have
been added to protect the species. For the first time, plants were also added in 1991 to the list.
zz Project Tiger
		
(a) In the faunal web, tiger is one of the key wildlife species. The major threats to tiger population are
many, e.g., shrinking habitat, growing human population, poaching for trade, depletion of prey,
base species, growing human population etc.
		
(b) Project Tiger was launched in 1973. Initially, it showed success, but unfortunately in 1993, the tiger
population had dropped to 3,600. Tiger reserves cover an area of 32137.14 sq km.

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz

74 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Tiger conservation not only meant to save the endangered species, but gave equal importance as a means of
preserving bio types of sizeable magnitude. There are 39 tiger reserves in India. Some of them are Bandhavgarh
National Park in Madhya Pradesh, Manas Tiger Reserve in Assam, Periyar Tiger Reserve in Kerala, Sariska Wildlife
Sanctuary in Rajasthan, Sunderbans National Park in West Bengal and Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand.
(c) Types and distribution of forest and wildlife resources : In India, most of the forest and wildlife resources are
owned or managed by the Forest department. They have classified forests under the following categories :
		 (i) Reserved forests
		 (ii) Protected forests
		 (iii) Unclassed forests
(d) Reserved and protected forests or permanent forest estate is maintained for producing timber and other forest
produce and for protective reasons.
(e) Under permanent forests the largest area is constituted by Madhya Pradesh accounting for 75% of its total
forest area.
zzCommunity and conservation :
(a) Conservation strategies are not new in our country. In some areas, local communities along with government
officials are struggling to conserve these habitats and secure their own long-term livelihood.
(b) Villagers have fought against mining by citing Wildlife Protection Act in Sariska Tiger Reserve, Rajasthan.
(c) In the Alwar district of Rajasthan, inhabitants of five villages have declared 1,200 hectares of forest as the
Bhairodev Dakav ‘Sonchuri’. They set their own rules and regulations which prohibited hunting and are
protecting the wildlife against any outside encroachment.
(d) The Mundas and Santhals of Chota Nagpur region worship mahua and kadamba tree. The tribals of Odisha
and Bihar worship the tamarind and mango during weddings.
(e) The famous Chipko movement in the Himalayas resisted deforestation paving way for community
afforestation.
(f) The Beej Bachao Andolan in Tehri and Navdanya promotes diversified crop production using minimum
synthetic chemicals.
(g) In India Joint Forest Management (JFM) programme was launched in 1988 and the state of Odisha was the first
one to take its resolution.
(h) JFM funishes a good example for involving local communities in the management and restoration of degraded
forests.

KNOW THE TERMS
zzFauna

: Animal species found on the earth in natural environment.
: Plant species found on the earth.
zzBiodiversity : It is the sum total of all varieties of plants, animals and micro-organisms found within a specified
geographic region.
zzAfforestation : The process of planting areas of land with trees in order to form a forest.
zzNormal Species : Species whose population is normal for their survival, such as cattle, sal, pine, rodents etc.
zzEndangered Species : These are species which are in danger of extinction, such as - blackbuck, crocodile, Indian
rhino, etc.
zzVulnerable Species : These are species whose population has decreased over a period of time and are in danger of
extinction, such as Gangetic dolphin, Asiatic elephant, etc.
zzRare Species : Species which are small in number and in danger of extinction if not been taken care of such as
Himalayan brown bear, hornbill, etc.
zzEndemic Species : These are species which are only found in some particular areas usually isolated by natural or
geographical barriers. Example : Andaman teal, Nicobar pigeon, etc.
zzExtinct Species : These are the species which have vanished from a local area, region, country, continent or the
entire earth. Example : Asiatic cheetah.
zzEcosystem or Ecological System : This is a system formed by the interaction of a community of organisms with
their physical environment.
zzReserved Forests : These forests are regarded as the most valuable as far as the conservation of forest and wildlife
resources are concerned.
zzProtected Forests : The forest land that is protected from any further depletion.
zzUnclassed Forests : These are other forests and wastelands that belong to both government and private individuals
and communities.
zzBiosphere Reserves : These are multipurpose protected areas created to deal with the issue of conservation of biodiversity and its sustainable use.
zzDeforestation : The process of destroying forests at a large scale.
zzFlora

[ 75

FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Asiatic Cheetah
		http://www.bbc.co.uk/nature/life/cheetah#p00715gc
2. Project Tiger
		http://projecttiger.nic.in/FAQ.asp
3. Project Elephant
		http://moef.nic.in/pe/pe.html
4. Joint Forest Management in Rajasthan
		http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wJFTUbqd8Ww

FLOWCHART

TOPIC-1

Bio Diversity or Biological Diversity ....
The Himalayan Yew in Trouble
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. How much forest area was converted into
agricultural land all over India according to the
Forest Survey of India between 1951 and 1980 ?
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JVWED]
Ans. 26,200 sq. km.
1
Q. 2. What is the main reason for the depletion of flora
and fauna ?
[Board Term 1, 2015 DDE Set-E]
Ans. Insensitivity to our environment.
1
Q. 3. Which organization of International level has
classified existing plants and animal species of
the world.
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-XOKG2SB]

1 mark each

Ans. International Union for Conservation of National
and Nature Resources (IUCN).
1
Q. 4. Name an endangered species.
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. Blackbuck, Indian rhino, crocodile, Indian wild
ass.		
(Any one) 1
Q. 8. Write the examples of endemic species.
Ans. Mithun, Nicobar Pigeon and Andaman wild pig. 1
Q. 9. Which two factors are majorly responsible for
depletion of forest resources ?
Ans. Grazing and fuel-wood collection.
1

76 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 11. Write the examples of rare species ?
Ans. Hornbill, Himalayan brown bear, wild Asiatic
buffalo and desert fox.
1
Q. 12. Write the examples of extinct species ?
Ans. Asiatic cheetah, Pink head buck.
1
Q. 16. What do you mean by madhuca insignis and
hubbardia heptaneuron ?
Ans. Madhuca insignis means a wild variety of Mahua.
Hubbardia heptaneuron refers to a species of
grass.
1
Q. 17. How many species of fauna and flora are found in
our country ?
Ans. 81,000 species of fauna and 47,000 species of flora
are found in our country.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. “Large-scale development projects have also
contributed significantly to the loss of forests.”
		Justify this statement with relevant examples. 		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE 2015 Set-M]
Ans. (i) Since 1951, over 5000 sq km forest was cleared
for river valley projects.
(ii) Clearing of forests is still continuing with projects
like the Narmada Sagar Project in Madhya Pradesh
which would inundate 40, 000 hectares of forest.
(iii) Mining is another important factor behind
deforestation.
1×3=3
Q. 2. Distinguish between endangered species and
vulnerable species of wild animals. Give one
example of each.
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans.
Endangered Species
(i)

These
are
the
species which are in
danger of extinction.

Vulnerable Species
(i)

These are the species
whose population
has decreased over a
period of time and in
danger of extinction.

(ii) The survival of these (ii) A vunerable species
species is difficult if
is a step short of
the negative factors
an
endangered
that have led to
species, which in
a decline in their
turn is a step short
population are not
of an extinct species.
checked in time.
(iii) Example
buck.

:

Black (iii) Example : Gangetic
dolphin.

1×3=3
Q. 3. What is Biodiversity ? Why is biodiversity important for human lives ? Explain.
[NCERT]
		 [Board Term 1, 2012 (39), 2011 (580018, 40, 44),
		
2010 (B2)]
Ans. Biodiversity is immensely rich in wildlife and
cultivated species, diverse in form and function
but closely integrated in a system through multiple
network of interdependence.
Biodiversity is important for human life because :
(a) It forms an ecological system keeping the air, water
and soil in balance.
(b) It provides us medicines and different types of
things which are useful for our survival.
(c) It makes the planet Earth safe. (Any two) 1×3=3

3 marks each
Q. 4. Classify Indian forests into three categories. Write
the main feature of each.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]
Ans. Classification of forests :
(a) Reserved Forest : They are regarded as most
valuable as far as the conservation of forest and
wildlife resources are concerned . Jammu and
Kashmir, Andhra Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Kerala,
Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Maharashtra have
large areas of reserved forests.
(b) Protected Forest : Almost one-third of total forest
area is protected forest. This forest land is protected
from any further depletion. Bihar, Haryana,
Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan
have a bulk of it under protected forests.
(c) Unclassed Forests : There are other forests and
wastelands belonging both government and
private individuals and communities. All North
Eastern states and parts of Gujarat have high % of
their forests as unclassed forests.
1×3=3
Q. 5. How have human activities affected the depletion
of flora and fauna ? Explain.
[NCERT]
		
[Board Term 1, 2012, 2011, 2010]
Ans. (a) Habitat destructions agricultural expansion
has resulted in destruction of habitat.
(b) Hunting is carried out illegally, thereby,
decreasing the number of animals.
(c) Poaching is done and parts of animals are sold for
profit.
(d) Overexploitation of resources, cutting of trees for
profit motive without replanting and conserving.
(e) Environmental pollution caused by industries
destroys soil and water.
(f) Poisoning the forest.
(Any three)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 6. What is Himalayan Yew ? Why is it under great
threat at present ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
Ans. It is a medicinal plant.
(a) Overexploitation of the tree has led to drying up
of many yew trees in Himachal and Arunachal
Pradesh.
(b) The biggest selling anti-cancerous drug in the
world, taxol, is extracted from it to treat cancers.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1½+1½=3
Q. 7. Write any three factors which are responsible for
large scale deforestation in India.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580023, 28, 33)]
Ans. Three factors which are responsible for large scale
deforestation in India are :

[ 77

FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES

(a)

(b)

The greatest damage inflicted on Indian forests was
during the colonial period due to the expansion of
the railways, agriculture, commercial and scientific
forestry and mining.
Agricultural expansion continues to be one of
the major causes of depletion of forest resources.
Between 1951 and 1980, according to the Forest

(c)
Survey of India, over 26,200 sq. km. of forest area
was converted into agricultural land all over India.
Substantial parts of the tribal belts, especially in
the north eastern and central India, have been
deforested or degraded by shifting cultivation
(Jhum), a type of ‘slash and burn’ agriculture.1×3=3


Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Classify forests of India on the basis of their
characteristics. [Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans.		 Classification of forests :
(a) Reserved Forest : They are regarded as most
valuable as far as the conservation of forest and
wildlife resources are concerned . Jammu and
Kashmir, Andhra Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Kerala,
Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Maharashtra have
large areas of reserved forest.

5 marks each
(b)

(c)

Protected Forest : Almost one-third of total
forest area is protected forest. This forest land
is protected from any further depletion. Bihar,
Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha
and Rajasthan have a bulk of it under protected
forest.
Unclassed Forests : There are other forests and
wastelands belonging both government and
private individuals and communities. All North
Eastern states and parts of Gujarat have high %
of their forests as unclassed forests.
1×3=3

TOPIC-2

Conservation of Forest and Wildlife in India
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Name a few trees that are considered sacred in
India ?
Ans. Peepal, Banyan and Mango.
1
Q. 2. What was the aim of Chipko Movement ?
Ans. Forest conservation.
1
Q. 3. Name the state in which Corbett National Park is
located.
Ans. Uttaranchal.
1
Q. 4. Sundarbans National Park is located in which
state ?
Ans. West Bengal.
1
Q. 5. When was Project Tiger launched ?
Ans. In 1973.
1
Q. 6. Which community in India is famous for
protecting the black buck ?
Ans. Bishnois.
1
Q. 7. Which conservation strategy do not directly
involve community participation ?
Ans. Demarcation of wildlife sanctuaries.
1
Q. 8. Expand JFM.
Ans. Joint Forest Management.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What is Joint Forest Management Programme ?
Which was the first state to adopt this
programme ? [Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) A programme which involves local
communities in the management and restoration
of degraded forests. It involves local communities
and land managed by forest department.
(ii) This programme was first passed in 1988 by the
state of Orissa.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2015) 1½ + 1½
Q. 2. What efforts or steps were taken by the government
to protect forests and wildlife of the country ?		
		
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		 Write a note on good practices towards conserving
forest and wildlife.
[NCERT]

1 mark each

3 marks each
Or
		Explain any three measures taken by the Indian
government to protect wildlife.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580014, 43) 2010 (B1)]
Ans. Measures taken by the Indian government to
protect wildlife are :
(a) The Indian Wildlife Protection Act was
implemented in 1972 with various provisions for
protecting habitats.
(b) An All-India list of protected species was also
published.
(c) To protect the remaining population of certain
endangered species government has banned
hunting, given legal protection of the habitats of
those species and restricted trade in wild life.

78 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(d)

Central and many state governments have
established
national
parks
and
wildlife
sanctuaries.
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 3. Analyse the involvement of different traditional
communities to conserve their own natural
habitats in India.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34, 36)]
Or
		Describe how communities have conserved and
protected forests and wildlife in India ? [NCERT]

Ans. (a) People of Sariska Tiger Reserve are fighting
against mining.
(b) The villages of five districts of Alwar declared 1200
hectares of forest Bhairodev Dakav “Sonchuri”.
(c) People involved in “Chipko Movement” resisted
deforestation.
(d) The Mundas and Santhals of Chhotanagpur
forest region worship trees-mahua and kadamba.
(e) People working some trades involved in joint
forest management.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Write a note on Joint Forest Management.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (A2)]
Ans. (a) In India, the Joint Forest Management
programme furnishes a good example for
involving local communities in the management
and restoration of degraded forests.
(b) The programme has been in formal existence since
1988 when the state of Odisha passed the first
resolution for Joint Forest Management.

5 marks each
(c)

(d)
Joint Forest Management depends on the
formation of local (village) institutions that
undertake protection activities mostly on degraded
forest land managed by the forest department.
In return, the members of these communities are
entitled to intermediary benefits like non-timber
forest produces and share in the timber harvested
by ‘successful protection’.
4×1½=5

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. With the help of three examples show how
communities have carried out conservation of flora
and fauna in India ?[Board Term 1, 2013 (10S), 2011
		
(5800, 30, 35), 2010 (B1)]
Ans. In some areas of India, local communities are
struggling to conserve these habitats alongwith
government officials reognizing that only this
will secure their own long-term livelihood. It is
proved by the following examples :
(a) In Sariska Tiger Reserve, Rajasthan, villagers
have fought against mining by citing the
Wildlife Protection Act. In many areas, villagers
themselves are protecting habitats and explicitly
rejecting government involvement.
(b) The inhabitants of five villages in the Alwar
district of Rajasthan have declared 1,200 hectares
of forest as the Bhairodev Dakar ‘Sonchuri’,
declaring their own set of rules and regulations
which do not allow hunting, and are protecting
the wildlife against any outside encroachments.
(c) The famous Chipko Movement in the Himalayas
has not only successfully resisted deforestation in
several areas but has also shown that community
afforestation with indigeneous species can be
enormously successful.
(d) Farmers and citizens’ groups such as the Beej
Bachao Andolan in Tehri and Navdanya have
shown that adequate levels of diversified crop
production without the use of synthetic chemicals
are possible and economically viable. (Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 2. Why is it necessary to increase the area of forest in
India?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580015)]
Ans. It is necessary to increase the area of forest in
India because :
(a) So far forest area is below the recommended ratio
of 33% to total geographical area.


3-5 marks each
(b)

To combat global warming, ozone depletion and
tsunami like disaster.
(c) A number of animals and plant species are
endangered or extinct due to depletion of forests.
		
1×3=3
Q. 3. Assess the need for the conservation of forests
and wildlife in India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. The is a need for the conservation of forests and
wildlife in India because :
(i) Conservation preserves the ecological diversity
and our life support systems such as water, air and
soil.
(ii) It also preserves the genetic diversity of plants and
animals for better growth of species and breeding.
(iii) For example, the plants, animals and microorganisms re-create the quality of air that we
breathe, the water we drink and the soil that
produces our food without which we can not
survive.
1×3=3
Q. 4. “The tree is a peculiar organism of unlimited
kindness and benevolence and makes no demand
for its sustenance, and extends generously the
products of its life activity. It affords protection to
all beings, offering shade even to the axemen who
destroy it’’. Study the paragraph and answer the
following questions :
(a) What is the nature of a tree ?
(b) What are the moral values that we learn from the
life of a tree ?
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H35)]
Ans. (a) It extends generously the products of its life
and provides protection to all beings.
(b) The moral values that we learn from the life
of a tree are that we should also be kind and
benevolent like a tree and always extend our help
to the needy people.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1½+1½=3

[ 79

FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES

HOTS Questions
Q. 1. Why do we need to conserve our forests and
wildlife ? Explain any two steps taken by the
government to protect forests and wildlife
resources.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. (a) We need to conserve our forests and wildlife
because :
		
(i) Conservation preserves the ecological diversity
and our life support system : air, water and soil.
		
(ii) Conservation also preserves the genetic
diversity of plants and animals for better
growth of species and breeding.
		
(iii) It makes the planet Earth safe.
(b) Steps taken by the government to protect forests
and wild life resources :
		
(i) The Indian Wildlife Protection Act was
implemented in 1972 with various provisions
for protecting habitats.
		
(ii) Central and many state governments have
established national parks and wildlife
sanctuaries.
1+2=3
Q. 2. Describe any five different types of species of
flora and fauna as per the classification given by
IUCN.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. They can be classified in the following ways :
(i) Normal Species : Species whose population is
normal for their survival. For example : Cattle, sal,
pine, rodents, etc.
(ii) Endangered Species : These are species which are
in danger of extinction. For example : Black buck,
crocodile, sangai etc.
(iii) Vulnerable Species : These are species whose
population has decreased over a period of time
and danger of extinction. For example : blue sheep,
Asiatic elephant, etc.
(iv) Rare Species : Species which are small in number
and in danger of extinction if not been taken care
of. For example : brown bear, desert fox, hornbill,
etc.
(v) Endemic Species : These are species which are only
found in some particular areas usually isolated by
natural or geographical barriers. For example :
Andaman teal, mithun, etc.
(vi) Extinct Species : These species have vanished from
a local area, region, country, continent or the entire
earth. For example : Asiatic Cheetah, pink head
duck, etc.
(Any five) 1×5=5
Q. 3. ‘Nature - worship is an old age belief’. Explain
how has it helped in the conservation of forests
and wild life.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. It has helped in the conservation of forests and
wildlife in the following ways :
(i) Such beliefs have preserved several virgin forests
in pristine form called Sacred Groves. These parts
of large forests have been left untouched by local
people.
(ii) Certain societies like the Mundas and the Santhals
revere a particular tree which they have preserved
since time immemorial.

3-5 marks each
(iii)

To many of us, Peepal and Banyan trees are
considered sacred.
(iv) Sacred qualities are often ascribed to springs,
mountain peaks, plants and animals which are
closely protected.
(v) One can find troops of macaques and langurs
around many temples. They are fed daily and are
treated as a part of temple devotees.
1×5=5
Q. 4. ‘’Forests play a key role in the ecological system.’’
Highlight the values of forest in our life.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (3K)]
Or
		Explain three reasons why we need to save the
biodiversity of our planet ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580024, 29, 34)]
Ans.		 We need to save the biodiversity of our planet
because :
(a) Human beings alongwith all living organisms
form a complex web of ecological system in
which they are only a part and are very much
dependent on this system for their existence.
(b) The plants, animals and micro-organisms recreate the quality of the air we breathe, the water
we drink and the soil that produces our food
without which we cannot survive.
(c) Forests play a key role in the ecological system as
these are also the primary producers on which all
other living beings depend.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 5. Mention any four major threats to the population
of tiger ? Explain the efforts made by the
government to protect them.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
Or
		Write a brief note on ‘Project Tiger’.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800, 13, 19, 38, 42),
		
2010 Set (A1)]
Ans. Tiger is one of the key wildlife species in the
faunal web. In 1973, the authorities felt that the
tiger population had dwindled to 1,827 from an
estimated 55,000 at the turn of the century. Major
threats to tigers are poaching for trade, shrinking
habitat, depletion of prey based species, growing
human population, etc.
		
‘Project Tiger’ is one of the well-publicised wildlife
campaigns in the world that was launched in
1973. In 1993, the population of tiger had dropped
to 3,600. There are 39 tiger reserves in India.
		
Corbett National Park in Uttaranchal, Sunderbans
National Park in West Bengal, Bandhavgarh
National Park in Madhya Pradesh, Sariska
Wildlife Sanctuary in Rajasthan, Manas Tiger
Reserve in Assam and Periyar Tiger Reserve in
Kerala are some of the tiger reserves of India.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 3



3

CHAPTER

WATER
RESOURCES

¾¾ Sources ; distribution; utilization ; multipurpose projects ; water scarcity ; need for conservation
and management; rainwater harvesting (one case study to be introduced).

QUICK REVIEW
3/4th of the earth’s surface is covered with water, but
TOPIC - 1
fresh water accounts for a small proportion. Fresh water
Water Scarcity and the need for water
is mainly obtained from surface run off and ground water
conservation; Multipurpose river
which is continually renewed and recharged through the
projects & Integrated Water Resource
hydrological cycle.
Management .... P. 82
zz Water scarcity : Due to variations in seasonal and annual
precipitation, the availability of water varies over place and
TOPIC - 2
time. Water scarcity is mainly caused due to the excessive use
Rainwater Harvesting .... P. 84
and unequal access to water for different social groups.
zz An area having ample water resources can have to face
water scarcity due to the following reasons :
(i) Greater demand for water by large and growing population and unequal access to it.
(ii) Water resources are being over-exploited to expand agriculture and consequently ground water
levels are falling.
(iii) Post independent India has witnessed intense industrialisation and urbanisation, exerting increasing
pressure on fresh water resources.
(iv) Multiplying urban centers with large and dense populations have further aggravated the problem of
water scarcity.
zz In housing societies or colonies, most of the houses have their own ground water pumping devices to
meet the water needs. Thus, water resources are being overexploited.
Multi-purpose River Projects and Integrated Water Resource Management :
zz The history reveals use of many sophisticated hydraulic structures from ancient times, such as dams of
stone, reservoirs or lakes, embankments and canals for irrigation.
zz Some ancient hydraulic structures are listed below :
(i) Sringaverapura near Allahabad had a sophisticated water harvesting system, which channelised the
flood water of Ganga river. It dates back to 1st century B.C.
(ii) There are many extensively built dams, lakes and irrigation systems. The most important lake is
Sudarshan lake.
(iii) Bhopal lake is one of the largest artificial lakes built in the 11th century A.D.
(iv) In the 14th century, the tank in Hauz Khas, Delhi was constructed by Iltutmish for supplying water
to the Siri Fort area.
zz Uses of dams :
(i) Irrigation.		 (ii) Electricity generation.
(iii) Water supply for domestic and industrial uses.		 (iv) Flood control.
(v) Recreation.		 (vi) Inland navigation.
(vii) Fish breeding.
zz Thus, dams are now referred to as multipurpose projects.
zz J.L. Nehru proudly proclaimed dams as the temples of modern India because of their potential to integrate
development of agriculture and the village economy with rapid industrialisation and growth of the urban
economy.
zz Reasons for opposing multi-purpose projects :
(i) Poor sediment flow.
(ii) Excessive sedimentation at the bottom of the reservoir.

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz

[ 81

WATER RESOURCES

(iii) Poorer habitats for the rivers’ aquatic life.
(iv) Difficult for aquatic fauna to migrate.
(v) Submerge the existing vegetation and soil leading to its decomposition over a period of time.
zzRain water harvesting : Rain water harvesting system was a viable alternative of multipurpose projects both socioeconomically and environmentally. Roof-top rain water harvesting was commonly practised in Rajasthan to store
drinking water.
zzIn arid and semi-arid regions of Rajasthan, almost all houses traditionally had underground tanks for storing
drinking water.
zzRain water is also referred to as palar pani and it is considered as the purest form of natural water.
zzRoof-top rain water harvesting is the most common practice in Shillong in Meghalaya.
zzTamil Nadu is the first and the only state in India which has made roof-top rain water harvesting structures
compulsory. There are legal provisions to punish the defaulters.

KNOW THE TERMS
zzHydrological

Cycle : This is the journey that water takes as it circulates from the land to the sky and back again. It
is also known as the ‘water cycle’.
zzFresh Water : Water not from the sea and is not salty or brackish.
zzGround Water : The water which exists below the ground surface is the zone of saturation and can be extracted
through well or any other means or emerges as springs and base flows in streams and rivers.
zzHydraulic Structure : All dams, lakes, canals, wells and ponds etc. in which rainwater is collected.
zzHydroelectricity : It is the power which is generated with the help of running water.
zzDam : A dam is a barrier across flowing water that obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often creating a reservoir,
lake or impoundment.
zzMultipurpose Project : A multi-purpose project or river valley project serves a number of purposes simultaneously
such as irrigation, flood control, generating hydroelectricity and tourism, e.g., the Bhakra Nangal Dam.
zzRain Water Harvesting : Rainwater harvesting is gathering, accumulating and storing rainwater for different uses.
zzAquifer : A layer of rock or soil which can absorb and hold water.
zzWater Scarcity : Shortage of water as compared to its demand is known as water scarcity.
zzGuls or Kuls : In hilly and mountainous regions, people build diversion channels like the ‘Guls’ or ‘Kuls’ of Western
Himalayas for agriculture.
zzInundation Canal : It is meant to direct flood waters during the rainy season.
zzDrip Irrigation : It is a type of irrigation in which water gets dropped in the form of drips close to roots of the plants
in order to conserve the moisture.
zzSurface Runoff : This is the water flow that occurs when the soil is infiltrated to full capacity and excess water from
rain, melted snow or other sources flows over the land.

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Traditional Rural Water Harvesting Structures
		http://www.rainwaterharvesting.org/Rural/Traditional3.html
2. Water distribution on the Earth
		http://ga.water.usgs.gov/edu/earthwherewater.html

FLOWCHART
Restore
ecosystem

Water
navigation

Fish
Breeding

Additional
irrigation

Recreational
activities

Dams - Modern Temples
(Multi-purpose projects)

Avoid drought
and famines

Hydropower

Source of
drinking water

Flood
control

82 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

TOPIC-1

Water Scarcity and the need for water
Conservation; Multipurpose river projects &
Integrated Water Resource Management
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Name any one river valley project which has
significantly contributed to the loss of forests.
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. Sardar Sarovar Dam.
1
Q. 2. How much of the earth surface is covered with
water ?
Ans. About 3/4th.
1
Q. 3. Write the major source of fresh water in India ?
Ans. Ground water.
1
Q. 4. How much percent of the total volume of world’s
water is estimated to exist as fresh water ?
Ans. 2.5 percent.
1
Q. 5. What percentage of the total volume of world’s
water is estimated to exist as oceans ?
Ans. 96.5%.
1
Q. 6. What is the interpretation of Falken mark, a
Swedesh expert about water stress and water
availability ?
Ans. He interpreted that water stress occurs when water
availability is between 1,000-1,600 cubic metre per
person per year.
1
Q. 7. What are the causes of water scarcity ?
Ans. Rapid growth of population, uneven distribution
of water resources and increase in demand of
water.
1

Q. 8. Which largest artificial lake was built in 11th
century ?
Ans. Bhopal lake.
1
Q. 9. On which river has Hirakud Dam been
constructed ?
Ans. River Mahanadi.
1
Q. 10. On which river ‘Bhakhra Nangal Dam’ has been
constructed ?
Ans. River Satluj.
1
Q. 11. Who proclaimed dams as the temple of modern
India ?
Ans. Jawaharlal Nehru.
1
Q. 12. Which river is known as the river of sorrow ?
Ans. Damodar river.
1
Q. 13. Name two social movements which were against
the multi purpose projects.
Ans. Narmada Bachao Andolan and Tehri Dam
Andolan.
1
Q. 14. Nagarjuna Sagar Dam is built on which river ?
Ans. Krishna.
1
Q. 15. On which river Salal Dam is built ?
Ans. Chenab.
1
Q. 16. In which regions the release of water from dams
during heavy rains aggravated the flood situation
in 2006 ?
Ans. Maharashtra and Gujarat.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Mention any four main objectives of multipurpose River Valley Projects. Name any two
Multipurpose Projects of India.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans.		Objectives of Multi-purpose Projects :
(i) Control floods and supply water during drought.
(ii) Provide irrigation facilities.
(iii) Generate electricity.
(iv) Supply water for domestic and industrial uses.
(v) Recreation.
(vi) Inland navigation.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2015) 3
Q. 2. Water scarcity in most cases is caused by over
exploitation, excessive use and unequal access
to water among different social groups. Explain
the meaning of the statement with the help of
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOKG2SB]
Ans. We can understand the meaning of the above
statement through these example :

1 mark each

3 marks each
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking
water in Kolkata.
A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in
the snow in a devastated village.
A Rajasthani woman balances her matka and travel
large distances to collect water.
1×3=3

Q. 3. Why did Jawaharlal Nehru proclaim the dams as
the “temples of modern India” ? Explain any three
reasons.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
				
[School of Yavatmal, 2015]
Ans. Jawaharlal Nehru proclaimed the dams as the
“temples of modern India” because :
(i) They eliminate or reduce flooding.
(ii) Provide water for agriculture.
(iii) Provide water for human and industrial
consumption.
(iv) Provide hydroelectricity for houses and
industries.
(Any three) 1×3=3

[ 83

WATER RESOURCES

Q. 4. How have intensive industrialization and
urbanization posed a great pressure on existing
fresh water resources in India. Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		 How does urbanization and urban lifestyle lead to
over exploitation of water resources ? Explain.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (3K)]
Or
		
How have intensive industrialization and
urbanization posed a great pressure on existing
fresh water resources in India ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36)]
Ans.		Post independent India witnessed intensive
industrialisation and urbanisation.
(a) Arrival of MNC’s : Apart from fresh water they
require electricity which comes from hydroelectric
power.
(b) Multiplying urban centers with large and dense
populations and urban life styles have not only
added to water and energy requirements but
have further aggravated the problem.
(c) Large-scale migration from rural to urban areas is
causing over exploitation of water resources.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3

(b)
(c)

the soil of the downstream region does not get
nutrient rich silt.
Dams also fragment rivers making it difficult for
aquatic fauna to migrate for spawning, i.e., to
produce eggs.
It resulted in displacement of local communities.
The local people often have to give up their
land and livelihood and their meagre access and
control over resources for the greater need of the
nation.
1½+ 1½=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)

Q. 6. Highlight any three hydraulic structures as part
of water management programmes initiated in
ancient India along with the period when they
were built. [Board Term 1, 2012 (34, 36, 55), 2011
		
(580018, 27, 33)]

Q. 5. List any three advantages and three disadvantages
of Multipurpose River Project.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3), 2012 (35)]
Or
		What are the advantages and disadvantages of
multipurpose river project.
[NCERT]
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]

Ans.		 Sophisticated hydraulic structures like dams build
of stone rubble, reservoirs or lakes, embankments
and canals for irrigation were built in various
regions of the country.
(a) A sophisticated water harvesting system channelling the flood water of river Ganga was built at
Sringaverapura near Allahabad in the Ist century
B.C.
(b) Nagarjunakonda in Andhra Pradesh, Bennur in
Karnataka, Kolhapur in Maharashtra and Kalinga
in Odisha have evidences of irrigation structures.
(c) In the 11th century, Bhopal Lake, one of the largest
artificial lakes of its time was built.
(d) The tank in Hauz khas, Delhi was constructed by
Iltutmish in the 14th century to supply water to
Siri Fort Area.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)

Ans.		 Advantages :
(a) These are the main source of power generation.
(b) They provide us neat, pollution free and cheapest
energy which is the backbone of industry and
agriculture.
(c) These projects control the floods because water
can be stored in them. These projects have
converted many, ‘rivers of sorrows’ into ‘rivers of
boon’.
(d) These projects are the main source of irrigation
and also help in conserving soil.
Disadvantages :
(a) Due to the construction of dams, there are no
adequate floods in the river. Because of this,

Q. 7. Why is groundwater a highly overused
resource ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580034)]
Ans. Groundwater is a highly overused resource because
of the following reasons :
(a) Due to large and growing population and
consequent greater demands for water and
unequal access to it.
(b) To facilitate higher food grain production for
large population, water resources are being over
exploited to expand irrigated areas and dry season
agriculture.
(c) In the housing societies or colonies in the cities,
there is an arrangement of own ground water
pumping devices to meet water needs.
1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Explain any three reasons responsible for water
scarcity in India ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2013, 2011 (580013, 23, 45)]
Or
		 Water is available in abundance in India even then
scarcity of water is experienced in major parts of
the country. Explain it with four examples.

5 marks each
Ans. (a) The availability of water resources varies over
space and time, mainly due to the variations in
seasonal and annual precipitation.
(b)

Over-exploitation, excessive use and unequal
access to water among different social groups.

84 ]
(c)

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Water scarcity may be an outcome of large and
growing population and consequent greater
demands for water. A large population means
more water to produce more food. Hence, to
facilitate higher food-grain production, water
resources are being over exploited to expand
irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture.

(d)

Most farmers have their own wells and
tubewells in their farms for irrigation to increase
their production. But it may lead to falling
groundwater levels, adversely affecting water
availability and food security of the people. Thus,
inspite of abundant water there is water scarcity.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1¼×4=5

TOPIC-2

Rainwater Harvesting
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which water is recharged by roof-top rainwater
harvesting technique ?
Ans. Ground water.
1
Q. 2. In which region, people built ‘Guls’ or ‘Kuls’ for
irrigation ?
Ans. Western Himalayas.
1
Q. 3. Mention one state where canal irrigation has
developed.

Ans. Nagaland.
1
Q. 4. Which state has made roof-top rainwater
harvesting structure compulsory to all the houses
across the state ?
Ans. Tamil Nadu.
1
Q. 5. In which state Bamboo drip irrigation, is
prevalent ?
Ans. Meghalaya.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Describe any three traditional methods of
rainwater harvesting adopted in different parts of
India.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]
Or
		 “Rain water harvesting system is viable alternative
both socially, economically and environmentally”.
Support the statement with three examples.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Or
		 Describe any three different rain water harvesting
systems practised in India.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans. (a) In hilly and mountainous regions, people built
diversion channels like ‘gul’ or ‘kul’ in Western
Himalaya for agriculture.
(b) Roof-top rain water harvesting was commonly
practised to store drinking water particularly in
Rajasthan.
(c) In West Bengal, people develop inundation
channels to irrigate their fields.
(d) In semi-arid regions agricultural fields were
converted into rain fed storage structures called
Khadins and Johads that allowed the water to
stand and moist the soil.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 2. Explain the working of underground tanks as
a part of roof top rainwater harvesting system
practised in Rajasthan.
[DDE-2015, Set-M]

1 mark each


3 marks each
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC), (R9UJGYG),
		
2012 (34, 39), 2011 (580040), 2010 (C1)]
Or
		How were the underground tanks beneficial to
the people of Rajasthan ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37)]
Or
		Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semiarid
regions of Rajasthan is carried out.
[NCERT]
Ans. (i) In semi-arid and arid regions of Rajasthan
almost all the houses traditionally had
underground tanks for storing drinking water.
They are extremely reliable source of drinking
water when other sources are dried up. This is
considered the purest form of natural water.
(ii) The tanks can be as large as big rooms.
(iii) The tanks were part of the well-developed rooftop rainwater harvesting system.
(iv) The tanks were built inside the main house or the
courtyard giving cooling effect to the rooms in
the summer.
(v) Those tanks were connected to the sloping roofs
of the houses through a pipe.
(vi) Rain falling on these rooftops would travel down
the pipe and stored in these underground tank’s.
(vii) Usually first rain water is not collected to
clean the rooftop and the pipe. (Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 3. What is Bamboo Drip Irrigation? Mention any
two features of it.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]

[ 85

WATER RESOURCES

Ans. Bamboo Drip Irrigation system is a 200 year old
system of tapping stream and spring water by
using bamboo pipe and transporting water from
higher to lower regions through gravity.
		Features :

18-20 liters of water enters the bamboo pipe
system, get transported over hundreds of meters

and finally reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at
the site of the plant.
(b)

(a)

The flow of water into the pipes is controlled by
manipulating the pipe positions.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why is roof top water harvesting important in
Rajasthan ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. Roof top water harvesting is important in
Rajasthan because :
(i) It was commonly practised to store drinking water.
(ii) The rainwater can be stored in the tankas till the
next rainfall making it an extremely reliable source
of drinking water when all other sources are dried
up, particularly in the summers.
(iii) Rain water, or palar pani, as commonly referred
to in these parts, is considered the purest form of
natural water.
(iv) Many houses construct underground rooms
adjoing the ‘tanka’ to beat the summer heat as it
would keep the room cool.
(v) Some houses still maintain the tanks since they do
not like the taste of top water.
1×5=5
Q. 2. Why are different water harvesting systems
considered a viable alternative both socioeconomically and environmentally in a country
like India ?[Board Term 1, 2011 (580011), 2010 (B1)]
Ans.		 Keeping into view the disadvantages and
rising resistance against the multi-purpose
projects, water harvesting system is considered
a viable alternative both socio-economically and
environmentally.
(a) In ancient India also alongwith the sophisticated
hydraulic structures there existed an extraordinary tradition of various water harvesting
systems.
(b) People adopted different techniques in different
areas. In hilly regions people built diversion
channels like the 'guls' or 'kuls' for agriculture.

5 marks each
(c)

Roof-top rain water harvesting was commonly
practised to store drinking water, particularly in
Rajasthan.
(d) In the flood plains of Bengal, people developed
inundation channels to irrigate their fields.
Khadins, Johads and Tanks are the forms of rain
water harvesting practised in Rajasthan.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2011) 1¼×4=5
Q. 3. Describe any four traditional methods of rain
water harvesting adopted in different parts of
India.		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580014, 16, 21, 28, 37, 41)]
Ans.		 Methods of rain water harvesting used in India
are :
(a) Guls and Kuls : People built guls and kuls in hilly
and mountainous regions to divert water. These
are simple channels. They are mainly used in
Western Himalayas.
(b) Roof top rain water harvesting : Commonly
practised to store drinking water in Rajasthan.
(c) Inundation Channels : These channels developed
in the flood plains of Bengal to irrigate fields.
(d) Khadins and Johads : In arid and semi-arid
regions, some agricultural fields were converted
into rain fed storage structures. These structures
are found in Rajasthan.
(e) Tanks : In Bikaner, Phalodi and Barmer, almost
all houses have tanks for storing drinking water.
Tanks are part of the well-developed roof top rain
water harvesting system.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2011) 5



4

CHAPTER

AGRICULTURE

¾¾ Types of farming ; major crops ; cropping pattern ; technological and institutional reforms ; their
impact ; contribution of agriculture to national economy—employment and output.

QUICK REVIEW
zz

		
		
		
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz
zz
zz

zz
zz
zz

Since agriculture is an age-old economic activity in India,
farming varies from subsistence to commercial type. At
TOPIC - 1
present, in different parts of India, the following farming
Types of Farming, Cropping Pattern
systems are practised :
and Major Crops .... P. 88
(i) Primitive subsistence farming : It depends upon
TOPIC - 2
monsoon, natural fertility of the soil and suitability of
Technological and Institutional
other environmental conditions to the crops grown.
Reforms .... P. 91
(ii) Intensive subsistence farming : It is done where high
doses of biochemical inputs and irrigation are used for
obtaining higher production.
(iii) Commercial farming : In this type of farming, the main
thing is the use of higher doses of modern inputs e.g., high yielding variety (HYV) seeds, chemical
fertilisers, insecticides and pesticides in order to obtain higher productivity.
The three cropping seasons of India are : Rabi, Kharif and Zaid.
Rabi crops are sown in winter from October to December and harvested in summer from April to June.
Kharif crops are grown with the onset of monsoon in different parts of the country and these are harvested
in September to October.
Between the Rabi and the Kharif seasons, there is a short season during the summer, known as the Zaid
season.
Major crops grown in India are rice, wheat, millets, pulses, tea, coffee, sugarcane, oilseeds, cotton, and
jute.
Horticulture crops : India is the largest producer of fruits and vegetables in the world. India is a producer
of tropical as well as temperate fruits.
India produces about 13 percent of the world’s vegetables. It is an important producer of pea, cauliflower,
onion, cabbage, tomato, brinjal and potato.
The non-food crops grown in India are rubber, fibre crops, cotton, jute, etc.
Rearing of silk worms for the production of silk fibre is known as sericulture.
Agriculture, which provides livelihood for more than 60 percent of its population, needs some serious
technical and institutional reforms. Thus, collectivisation, consolidation of holdings and abolition of
Zamindari etc. were given priority to bring about institutional reforms.
India’s food security policy has a primary objective to ensure availability of food grains to the common
people at an affordable price. It has enabled the poor to have access to the food.
The green revolution promised improvement in the condition of marginal and small farmers.
Genetic engineering is recognised as a powerful supplement in inventing new hybrid varieties of seeds.

KNOW THE TERMS
zz
zz
zz
zz

Agriculture : The science and art of cultivating soil, raising crops and rearing animals.
Primitive Subsistence Farming : Farming on small patch of land with the help of primitive tools such as
hoe, dao and digging sticks and family or community labour.
Intensive Subsistence Farming : Increase in the agricultural production by using scientific methods and
better agricultural inputs.
Plantation Farming : In this type of farming, a single crop is grown on a large area.

[ 87

AGRICULTURE
zzCommercial

Farming : Farming in which the farmer grows the crops with the sole aim of selling the produce for
commercial purpose.
zzSericulture : Rearing of silk worms for the production of silk.
zzHorticulture : Intensive cultivation of vegetables, fruits and flower crops.
zzJhumming : Burning a piece of land for cultivation by a forest tribes.
zzThe Green Revolution : Technologies that were introduced to increase the agricultural production such as use of
HYV of seeds, fertilizers, modern machinery and inputs.
zzWhite Revolution : Also called ‘Operation Flood’ technology that was introduced to increase milk production.
zzBloodless Revolution : Bhoodan and Gramdan Movement initiated by Vinoba Bhave in 1951 is known as the
Bloodless Revloution.
zzRabi : Crops are grown at the beginning of winters and harvested at the beginning of summers.
zzKharif : Crops are grown with the onset of monsoon and harvested at the beginning of winters.
zzZaid : A short cropping season in between the Rabi and the Kharif seasons used for growing vegetables and fodder
crops.
zzMillets : Jowar, Bajra and Ragi are called millets. These are known as coarse grains.
zzCrop Rotation : Growing of different crops in succession on the same field from season to season to maintain soil
fertility.
zzIrrigation : An artificial means of watering the standing crops is called irrigation.
zzICAR : Indian Council of Agriculture Research.
zzFCI : Food Corporation of India.
zzOrganic Farming : Farming which is practised without factory made chemicals such as fertilizers and pesticides.
zzMinimum Support Price (MSP) : A minimum guaranteed price of a crop, fixed and announced by the government
before the start of a cropping season.
zzKissan Credit Card (KCC) : This is a credit card to provide affordable credit for farmers in India.

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Photos of Indian Crops with Detail
		http://www.mahindrakisanmitra.com
2. Cotton Cultivation
		http://www.mrcseeds.com
3. Jute Fibre Extraction from Plant
		http://www.woldjute.com

FLOWCHART
Agriculture

Types of farming

Major crops

Cropping Pattern

Primitive
Subsistence farming

Food crops
(Rice, wheat, millets, maize,
pulses, sugarcane etc.)

Rabi Season

Intensive
Subsistence farming
Commercial farming
Plantation farming

Oilseed crops
(Groundnut, Mustard, Soyabeen,
Seasamum, Lineseed, Sunflower etc.)
Beverage crops
(Tea, Coffee)
Horticulture crops
(Fruits and Vegetables)
Fibre crops
(Jute and Cotton)

Kharif Season
Zaid Season

88 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

TOPIC-1

Types of Farming, Cropping Pattern and
Major Crops
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which two areas of India produce oranges mainly ?
		
[School of Yavatmal, 2015]
Ans. Nagpur and Cherapunjee.
1
Q. 2. Which crop is the major crop of rabi ?
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. Wheat.
1
Q. 3. By which other name is ‘slash and burn’
agriculture known ?
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. Primitive subsistence farming/Jhumming.
		
(Any one) 1
Q. 4. India is the largest producer as well as consumer
of which agricultural product in the world ?		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Pulses.
1
Q. 5. In which type of soil does maize grow well ?
Ans. Old alluvial.
1
Q. 6. Which crop is grown with the onset of monsoons
and are harvested in the month of September and
October ?
Ans. Kharif.
1
Q. 7. Name some rabi crops.
Ans. Wheat, barley, peas, gram and mustard.
1
Q. 8. In which system of agriculture, a single crop is
grown on a large area ?
Ans. Plantation agriculture.
1
Q. 9. Name some plantation crops.

Ans. Tea, coffee, rubber, sugarcane and banana.
1
Q. 10. In which country the ‘slash and burn’ agriculture
is known as ‘Roca’ ?
Ans. Brazil.
1
Q. 11. Hoe, dao, digging sticks are associated with which
type of farming ?
Ans. Primitive subsistence farming.
1
Q. 12. Name the crop for which India is the largest
producer in the world.
Ans. Fruits and vegetables.
1
Q. 13. Which type of farming is intensive subsistence
farming ?
Ans. Labour intensive farming.
1
Q. 14. Which country is the first largest producer of
rice ?
Ans. China.
1
Q. 15. Name the two important wheat growing zones in
India.
Ans. The Ganga-Satluj plains in the north-west and
black soil region of the Deccan.
1
Q. 16. Which crop is used both as food and fodder ?
Ans. Maize.
1
Q. 17. Which crop is known as golden fibre ?
Ans. Jute.
1
Q. 18. Which state is the largest producer of ragi ?
Ans. Karnataka.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which are two main cropping seasons in India ?
Mention their growing and harvesting periods.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOKG2SB]
Ans. The two main cropping seasons are rabi and kharif.
(i) Rabi crops are sown in winter from October to
December and harvested in summer from April to
June.
(ii) Kharif crops are sown with the onset of monsoon
in different parts of the country and harvested in
September-October.
1½ + 1½ = 3
Q. 2. What are the growing conditions required for the
main staple food crop of India ? Mention the main
growing regions.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. (a) Growing conditions required for rice :
		
(i) High temperature (above 25°C). It is a Kharif
crop.
		
(ii) High humidity with annual rainfall above 100
cm.

1 mark each

3 marks each
(b)

Main growing regions : Northern plains, deltaic
plains, river valleys.
3
Q. 3. Explain any two geographical conditions required
for the cultivation of pulses. Name any two
important pulses producing states.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (3K)]
Or
		Why the pulses crop are mostly grown in rotation
with other crops ? Name any two major pulse
producing states ? [Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 13)]
Ans.		 Pulse crops are mostly grown in rotation with
other crops because :
(a) Pulses need less moisture and survive even in dry
conditions.
(b) Being leguminous crops, all these crops help in
restoring soil fertility by fixing nitrogen from the
air.
(c) Major pulse producing states are : Madhya
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3

[ 89

AGRICULTURE

Q. 4. Give an account of oilseeds in India. State the
importance of groundnut and name the states
where it is grown.
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
Or
		Describe the uses of oilseeds ? Which state is the
largest producer of groundnut ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (5800 32)]
Ans. Importance :
(a) Are edible and used as cooking medium.
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)

Used as raw material in production of soap,
cosmetics and ointment.
India-largest producer.
Groundnut :
Kharif crop
Accounts half of the total oilseed production.
State : Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Gujarat, Maharashtra.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Explain any three geographical conditions
required for the growth of rice in India. How is
it possible to grow rice in areas of less rainfall ?
Explain with examples.
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. Three geographical conditions for the growth of
rice :
(i) It requires high temperature, (above 25°C).
(ii) Annual rainfall above 100 cm.
(iii) High humidity
l It is possible to grow rice in areas of less rainfall
with the help of irrigation in Punjab and
Haryana.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2015) 5
Q. 2. Mention any two geographical conditions
required for the growth of maize crop in India.
Describe any three factors which have contributed
to increase in maize production.		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015 Set-M]
Ans. Geographical conditions required for the growth of
maize crop in India :
(i) It is a kharif crop which requires temperature
between 21°C to 27°C.
(ii) It grows well in alluvial soil.
Use of modern inputs such as HYV Seeds, fertilisers
and irrigation have contributed to the increasing
production of maize.
2×3=5
Q. 3. What are the climatic conditions required for the
growth of rice ?
[NCERT]
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. Climatic conditions required for the growth of rice :
(i) It is a Kharif crop which requires high temperature
(above 25°C).
(ii) High humidity with annual rainfall above 100 cm.
(iii) In the areas of less rainfall, it grows with the help of
irrigation.
(iv) It is grown in the plains of north and north-eastern
India, coastal areas and the deltaic regions.
(v) Development of dense network of canal irrigation
and tubewells have made it possible to grow rice in
areas of less rainfall such as Punjab and Harayana.
		
1×5=5
Q. 4. Define plantation agriculture. Explain any four
characteristics of plantation agriculture.
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (3K), 2012 (45)]


5 marks each
Ans.		 Plantation Agriculture : It is a type of commercial
farming practised in tropical and sub-tropical
regions. It was introduced by the British in India.
		Characteristics :
(a) A single crop is grown over large area.
(b) It is capital intensive and done with migrant
labour.
(c) All produce is used as raw material in industries
such as tea, coffee, rubber, sugarcane, banana.
(d) Plantation has interface of agriculture and
industry both.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1+4=5
Q. 5. Explain Rubber cultivation in India under the
following heads :
		
(a) Importance (b) Geographical conditions (c)
Producing states.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (39), 2011 (580011, 33)]
Ans. (a) Importance : Many industries depend upon
Rubber as their raw material especially transport
industry.
(b) Geographical conditions :
		
(i) It is an equatorial crop, but also grown in
tropical and sub-tropical areas.
		
(ii) It requires moist and humid climate with
rainfall of more than 200 cm and temperature
above 25°C.
(c) Rubber producing states are Kerala, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
Garo hills of Meghalaya.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2+2=5
Q. 6. Explain any four features of primitive subsistence
agriculture in India ?
		[Board Term 1, 2011 (580017, 24, 30, 40, 15, 22, 23)]
Ans. Features of primitive subsistence agriculture in
India are :
(a) It is practised on small patches of land with the
help of primitive tools.
(b) Tools which are used are basically traditional tools
such as hoe, dao and digging stick.
(c) This type of agriculture totally depends upon
monsoon.
(d) When the soil fertility decreases, the farmers shift
to another plot of land.
1¼×4=5

90 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 7. What is Intensive subsistence farming? Write
three features of intensive farming.
				

[Board Term 1, 2011 (580021, 27, 38)]

Ans. Intensive subsistence farming is practised in areas
of high population pressure on land. In this type
of farming, the agricultural production is increased
by using high doses of biochemical inputs and
better agricultural inputs.
Features of intensive farming :
(a)

High yielding variety (HYV) seeds and modern
chemical inputs and irrigation are used to increase
the production.

(b)

The per hectare yield is very high.

(c)

More than one crop is cultivated during a year.
		
2+3=5

Q. 8. Which are the two major cotton producing states
of North India ? Describe four geographical
conditions required for the growth of cotton.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]
Or
		 Describe the geographical conditions required
for the cultivation of cotton ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580028, 39)]
Ans.		Haryana and Uttar Pradesh are the two major
cotton producing states of North India.
		
Geographical conditions required for the
cultivation of cotton :
(a) It grows well in drier parts of the black cotton soil
of the Deccan plateau.
(b) It requires high temperature.
(c) It requires light rainfall or irrigation.
(d) It requires 210 frost free days and bright sunshine
for its growth.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5
Q. 9. Describe any four geographical conditions
required for the growth of tea. Mention the two
major tea producing states of South India.
		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37)]
Or
		Name the important beverage crop introduced
by the British in India. Explain the geographical
conditions needed for its cultivation. Write any
two important states where it is grown.
Or
		In which agricultural production, India is the
leading producer as well as exporter in world?
Describe the geographical requirements for its
growth and development.
				

[Board Term 1, 2012 (77)]
Or

		What are the soil type, climatic conditions and
rainfall conditions required for the cultivation of
tea ? Write two states of India where tea grows.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580011)]

Ans.		 Tea : Grows well in tropical and sub-tropical
climates.
		 Soil type : Deep and fertile, well-drained soil, rich
in humus and organic matters.
		Climate : Warm and moist, frost-free climate
throughout the year.
		Rainfall : Frequent showers throughout the year.
		Two states : Assam, West Bengal, Kerala, Tamil
Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Andhra
Pradesh, Meghalaya and Tripura.
(Any two)
				
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 4+1=5
Q. 10. Describe four geographical conditions required
for the growth of sugarcane. Name two major
sugarcane producing states of North India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (53)]
Or
		What geographical conditions are required for
the cultivation of sugarcane? Name two largest
producing states of sugarcane.
				 [Board Term 1, 2011 (580013, 35), 2010 (A1)]
Ans. Geographical conditions required for the growth
of sugarcane in India :
(a) It is a tropical as well as sub-tropical crop so
it requires a hot and humid climate with a
temperature of 24°C to 27°C.
(b) It requires an annual rainfall between 75 to 100
cms.
(c) It can be grown on a variety of soils.
(d) Major sugarcane producing states of North India
are : Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Punjab, Haryana.
(Any two)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 4+1=5
Q. 11. “Wheat and Rice farming in India are fairly
different from each other”. Support the statement
with five suitable examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Or
		Wheat and Rice farming in India are fairly
different from each other. Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580041), Delhi 2011]
Ans. Basic of difference :
Basis of
difference

Wheat

Rice

(a) Rainfall

50-75 cm

Above 100 cm

(b) Temperature

15°C

Above 25°C

Area wise
(c)
distribution

North and
north-west

Plains of north
and
north-west
parts
of
the
country

(d) Type of crop

Rabi

Kharif

Major
(e)
Punjab
West Bengal
Producer
		
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 12. Distinguish between Primitive subsistence
farming and Commercial farming by stating five
points of distinction.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]

[ 91

AGRICULTURE

Ans.
Subsistence farming

Commercial farming

Q. 13. Compare the geographical conditions required for
the production of cotton and jute.
Ans.

(a)

It is practised on small It is practised on a large
patches.
scale.

(b)

Farming depend on Irrigation facilities are
irrigation.
available.

(a)

(c)

Primitive
used.

Cotton requires more Jute requires
than 21°C of temperature. temperature.

(b)

Rainfall : 50 – 100 cm.

tools

(d) Production is low.

are Modern technology is
used.

Cotton

Production is higher.

Jute
30°C

Rainfall : Near about
150 cm.

(e)

No costly fertilisers are Chemical fertilisers are
used.
used.

(c)

Frost free days are must Hot
and
humid
during picking days
climate is required.

(f)

Family
members
Labourers are hired.
provide labour.

(d)

Loamy and black soil is Well-drained fertile
required.
loamy soil is required.

(g)

Only cereals and other Commercial
food crops are grown grown.

(e)

Mainly
grown
Maharashtra
Gujarat.

crops

are

			
(Any five)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5

in
Grown in eastern
and
states of the country.
1×5=5

					

TOPIC-2

Technological and Institutional Reforms
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. By whom the Bhoodan-Gramdaan movement was initiated ?
Ans. Vinoba Bhave.
1

Q. 2. What is the full form of ICAR ?
Ans. Indian Council of Agricultural Research.

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Describe the institutional and technical changes
introduced in the field of agriculture in India in
the recent years. [Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Or
		 Describe any three technological and institutional
reforms made in the field of agriculture in India.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB, C5JWEVD]
Or
		What were the attributes of the comprehensive
land development programme initiated in India
in the 1980s and 1990s.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E, M]



3 marks each
Ans. (a) Land reforms : collectivisation, consolidation of
holdings, cooperation and abolition of zamindari.
(b) Agricultural reforms : Green revolution and White
revolution.
(c) Land development programmes : Provision for
crop insurance against drought, flood, cyclone
etc., establishment of Grameen banks, Cooperative
societies and banks for providing loans.
(d) Issuing of Kissan Credit Card and Personal
Accident Insurance Scheme, etc.
(e) Special weather bulletins and agricultural
programmes for farmers on radio and TV.
		
		
(Any three) 1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why has the agriculture sector in India got a major
set back in spite of increase in the GDP growth
rate ?
[Board Term 1, DDE- 2015, Set-M]

1 mark each

5 marks each
Ans. (i) More and more land is used for construction
of factories, warehouses and shelters which have
reduced the land under cultivation.
(ii)

Soil gets degraded by the use of pesticides
fertilizers over irrigation etc which leads to water
logging and salinity.
(iii)

Today Indian farmers are facing a big challenge
from international competition.

(iv)

Our government is reducing the public investment
in agriculture, subsidy on fertilizers have decreased.

(v)

Reduction in import duties on agricultural
products have proved detrimental to agriculture in
the country.
1

1×5=5

92 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 2. Suggest any five measures to enhance the
agricultural production in India.
[NCERT]
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Or
		Explain any five Institutional and Technical
Reforms brought by the government to improve
the condition of Indian Agriculture.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35), 2011 (580018, 20),
		
2010 (C1)]
Or
		Describe any five steps taken by the government
of India to increase the productivity of agriculture
in India ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]
Ans. (a) Land reforms : Collectivisation, consolidation
of holdings, cooperation and abolition of
zamindari.
(b) Agricultural reforms : Green revolution and
White revolution.
(c) Land development programmes : Provision
for crop insurance against drought, flood,
cyclone etc., establishment of Grameen banks,
Cooperative societies and banks for providing
loans.
(d) Issuing of Kissan Credit Card and Personal
Accident Insurance Scheme, etc.
(e) Special weather bulletins and agricultural
programmes for farmers on radio and TV.
(f) Government announces Minimum Support Price
(MSP) and remunerative and procurement prices
to check exploitation.
(g) The government provides HYV seeds and
fertilisers.
(h) Government provides technical assistance and
training for farmers.
(i) Soil testing facilities, cold storage and
transportation facilities are provided by
government for farmers.
(Any five)
		
		 (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5

Q. 3. Why has Indian agriculture started a decline in the
trend of food production? How can we overcome
this problem?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580032, 43)]
Ans. Indian agriculture started a decline in the trend of
food production because :
(a)

More and more land is used for construction of
factories, warehouses and shelters have reduced
the land under cultivation.

(b)

Soil gets degraded by the use of pesticides,
fertilizers over-irrigation etc. which leads to water
logging and salinity.

(a)

Use of agricultural techniques
environmentally sustainable.

(b)

Use of biotechnology in modifying different crops
and increase the yield per hectare. It reduces
dependence on insecticides and also require less
water.
2½+2½=5

Remedial Measures :
are

Q. 4. Why is agriculture called the mainstay of Indian
economy ?
Or
		What is the importance of agriculture in Indian
economy ?
Ans. (a) Agriculture is the mainstay of Indian economy
because about 67% of our population depends
directly or indirectly on agriculture.
(b)

It provides raw materials to the industries.

(c)

India earns foreign exchange by exporting
agricultural products.

(d)

It contributes about 29% to the gross domestic
product.
It provides food to over 1027 million population.
		
1×5=5

(e)

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. After 1990 globalization has caused difficulties
to Indian farmers, how do you think the lot of
farmers can be improved in India ?
Ans. Farmers are unable to compete with foreign
agricultural products. To improve their condition
and prevent farmer suicides, various suggestions
are as follows :

which

3 marks each
(a)
(b)
(c)

Genetic engineering can help to invent hybrid
seeds.
Organic farming will preserve the soil, water and
environment.
Diversification of crops from only cereals to highvalue crops which can grow easily in Indian
climatic conditions.
1×3=3



[ 93

MAP WORK

MAP WORK
(1 mark each for Labelling/Identifying)
1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Identify Major Soil Types :
Forest and Mountainous Soil
Alluvial
Red and Yellow
Black
Laterite
Arid

[DDE-2015, Set-M][Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE), (WQ7FXWC)]
			[Board Term 1, 2013, (3K)]
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD][Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
			[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014, 2013 (H3)]

N

E

P

A

L

N
TA
U
H

B

BANGLA
DESH

ARABIAN
SEA

Black
Alluvial
Red and Yellow
Laterite
Arid (Desert soil)
Forest and Mountainous

94 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

2. Locate and Label.
		
(a) Salal Project
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014, (X30T4XE)]
		
(b) Bhakra Nangal Project
		
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
		
(c) Tehri
		
(d) Maithon
		
(e) Panchet
		
(f) Rana Pratap Sagar
[DDE-2015, Set-M]
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
		
(g) Gandhi Sagar
		
(h) Sardar Sarovar
		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
		
(i) Rihand
		
(j) Hirakud [Board Term 1, KVS-2014, 2013 (3K)]
		
		[Board Term 1, 2015, 6AP67LB, C5JWEVD, DDE-2015, Set-M]
		
(k) Nagarjunasagar
		
(l) Tungabhadra
		
(m) Mettur
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
(n) Periyar [Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
		
(o) Koyna

Salal Project (a)
Bhakra Nangal Project (b)
Tehri (c)

Rihand (I)

Gandhi
Sagar (g)

Maithon (d)
Panchet (e)

Sardar
Sarovar (h)

Rana Pratap
Sagar (f)

Hirakud (I)

Koyna (o)
Nagarjunasagar (k)

Tungabhadra (l)

Mettur (m)

Periyar (n)

SRI
LANKA
I N D I A N

O C E A N

[ 95

MAP WORK

3. Identify, locate and label.
		Major producer states of :
		(1) Jute
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
		(3) Rubber
		(5) Tea
		(7) Millets and Maize

(2)
(4)
(6)

Cotton
Sugarcane
Coffee

INDIA
PAKISTAN
CHINA
(TIBET)

Bay
of
Bengal

Sri Lanka

Jute
Cotton
Rubber
Sugarcane
Tea
Coffee
Millets and Maize

100

0

100 200 300 400 500

Andman
and
Nikobar

96 ]
4. Identify, locate and label.
		Major rice growing areas :

5. Identify, locate and label.
		Major wheat growing areas :

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

[ 97

MAP WORK

6. Locate and label :
		
(a) Jim Corbett National Park (Uttarakhand)		
		
(b) Sunderban National Park (West Bengal)		
		
(c) Sariska Wildlife Sanctuary (Rajasthan)		
		
(d) Bandhavgarh National Park (Madhya Pradesh)
		
(e) Manas Tiger Reserve (Assam)
		
(f) Periyar Tiger Reserve (Kerala)		

[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), NCT-2014]
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
[DDE-2015, Set-M, E][Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set- 6AP67LB, C5JWEVD]
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, 2013 (3K)]
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]

INDIA
WILDLIFE

(a) Jim Corbett National Park (Uttarakhand)
(e) Manas Tiger Reserve (Assam)

(c) Sariska
Wildlife
Sanctuary

(d) Bandhavgarh
National Park
(MP)

(b) Sunderban
National Park
(West Bengal)

(f) Periyar Tiger
Reserve (Kerala)

7. (a) One feature A is shown in the given political outline map of India. Identify this feature with the help of
following information and write its correct name on the line marked on the map :
		
(A) A soil type
(b) On the same political outline map of India, locate and label the following features with appropriate symbols :
		
(B) A State which is the major producer of sugarcane
		
(C) Manas Tiger Reserve

98 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(A)
Forest and
Mountainous
(C)

Manas
Tiger
Reserve
Maharashtra (B)
Sugarcane
Producer
State

Z

cm 100 0 100

300

500 km

		



UNIT – III

Democratic
Politics II

SYLLABUS

1

CHAPTER

POWER
SHARING

¾¾ Why and how is power shared in democracies ?

QUICK REVIEW
zz

Belgium is a small European country. Brussels is the capital
of this country.

zz

In Belgium people speak mainly three languages—Dutch
TOPIC - 1
Belgium and Sri Lanka &
(59 percent), French (40 percent) and German (1 percent).
Majoritarianism in Sri Lanka .... p. 101
Sri Lanka is an island country. It has a diverse population.
TOPIC - 3
In Sri Lanka, 74 percent people speak Sinhala and 18 percent
Accomodation in Belgium forms of power
people speak Tamil.
sharing .... p. 103
In Sri Lanka, there are four religions :
(i) Buddhism
(ii) Islam
(iii) Hinduism
(iv) Christianity
In 1956, an act was passed to recognise Sinhala as the only official language of Sri Lanka.
A strategy wherein all the major segments of the society are provided with a permanent share of power
in the governance of the country is known as power sharing.
Political equality implies that all citizens should have the same political rights and should have equal
access to all offices of authority.
Government is the institution through which the will of the state is created, expressed and implemented.
The three main organs of the Government are : (i) Legislature, (ii) Executive and (iii) Judiciary.
The broad divisions of reasons for power sharing are prudential reason and moral reason.
Ethnicity is a population of human beings whose members identify with each other on the basis of
common cultural, behavioural, linguistic and religious traits.
A violent conflict between various groups in a country due to undermining of a particular group’s interests
or sentiments by the other group is called civil war.
A government in which different social groups are given the power to handle the affairs related to their
communities is known as community government.
A political philosophy or belief which asserts that a majority of the population has the right to take
decisions disregarding the wishes and needs of the minority is known as majoritarianism.

zz
zz
zz

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz
zz
zz

KNOW THE TERMS

			
zz

Power Sharing : The division of power between different stages of government, different organs or
different communities in a country in order to ensue smooth run of the government and to check that all
powers are not concentrated within one hand.

100 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

zzDemocracy

: A form of government which literally means “rule by the people”.

zzMajoritarianism

: Under majoritarianism, majority community rules the country in its own way by disregarding
the wishes and needs of the minority.

zzLegislature
zzFederal

: A kind of deliberative assembly with the power to pass, amend and repeal laws.

Government : A general government for the entire country is usually called federal government.

zzCommunity

Government : In which different social groups are given the power to handle the affairs related to
their communities.
zzCivil War : A war like conflict between different groups of people residing in the same country.
zzEthnic : A social division based on shared culture.
zzPrudential : Based on prudence or on careful calculation of gains and losses. Prudential decisions are usually
contrasted with decisions based purely on moral considerations.
zzCheck and Balances : A system, in which each organ of the government checks the others, which results in a
balance of power among various institutions.
zzCoalition Government : A government formed by the union of two or more political parties.
zzPressure Groups : Pressure groups are those organisations that attempt to influence the policies of the government
to safeguard their own interests.
zzIndian Tamils : The Tamilians whose forefathers came from India as plantation workers during colonial rule and
settled in Sri Lanka are called ‘Indian Tamils’.
zzSri Lankan Tamils : Tamil natives of Sri Lanka are called ‘Sri Lankan Tamils’.
zzRegional Antonomy : Decentralization of governance to the outlying regions.
zzRefugee : One who flees for shelter is called refugee.
zzLegitimate Government : A legitimate government is one where citizens, through participation, aquire a stake in
the system.
zzHorizontal Distribution of Power : Power is shared among different organs of government such as legislative,
executive and judiciary.
zzVertical Division of Power : Distribution of power between higher and lower levels of government such as between
central and state governments.

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Power Sharing in Belgium
		http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Politics_of_Belgium
2. Sri Lanka Tamil Crisis
		http://www.ndtv.com/topic/tamil_eelam

FLOWCHART
Power Sharing

Horizontal Distribution of Power

Vertical Division of Power

Legislature

Union/Central Government

Executive

Regional/State Government

Judiciary

Local Government
(Muncipality/Panchayat)

[ 101

POWER SHARING

The Forms of Power Sharing in

Belgium

Sri Lanka

Belgium is a small country in Europe with
a very complex ethnic composition.

Sri Lanka is an island nation
in the Indian Ocean.

Of the country's total population, 59% Dutch speakers,
40% French speakers and 1% German speakers.

Sri Lanka has a diverse population with 74%
Sinhalese and 18% Tamils. Christians are about 7%.

The capital is Brussels.

The capital is Colombo.

Between 1970 and 1993, the constitution
of Belgium was amended four times.

In 1956, an Act was passed to recognise
'Sinhla' as the only official language.

Belgium followed a Community Government,
which is elected by people belonging to one language
community - Dutch, German and French speaking.

Sri lanka followed 'Majoritarianism'
disregardiang Tamils.

TOPIC-1

Belgium and Sri Lanka Majoritarianism in
Sri Lanka
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which language was recognised as the only
official language of Sri Lanka in 1956 ?
OR
		Which language is spoken by majority of Sri
Lankans ?
				[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LO, C5JVWED]
Ans. Sinhala.
1
Q. 2. Which factor is responsible for increasing the
feeling of alienation among the Sri Lankan,
Tamils ?
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set DDE]
Ans. Majoritarianism.
1
Q. 3. What measure was adopted by the democratically
elected government of Sri Lanka to establish
Sinhala Supremacy ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. Majoritarian measure.
1
Q. 4. What is the state religion of Sri Lanka ?		
		
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. Buddhism.
1
Q. 5. Who formed the majority in terms of population
in Sri Lanka ?
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. Sinhala community.
1
Q. 6. What is vertical division of powers?
Ans. Division of powers between higher and lower
levels of government is called vertical division. 1

1 mark each

Q. 7. In which country the principle of majoritarianism
led to a civil war ?
Ans. Sri Lanka.
1
Q. 8. Majority of the people in Belgium speak which
language ?
Ans. Dutch.
1
Q. 9. Which language is not spoken by most of the
people in Belgium ?
Ans. German.
1
Q. 10. Which ethnic group is related to Belgium ?
Ans. Dutch, French and Germans.
1
Q. 11. Which city is the capital of Belgium?
Ans. Brussels.
1
Q. 12. ‘Sri Lankan Tamil’ refers to which social group ?
Ans. Tamil native of the country.
1
Q. 13. Who elects the community government in
Belgium ?
Ans. People belonging to one language community
only.
1
Q. 14. Name one country with which Belgium does not
have borders ?
Ans. Sweden.
1
Q. 15. Which composition best explains the complex
ethnic composition of Belgium ?

102 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. It has 59% Dutch speaking, 40% French speaking
and 1% German speaking people.
1
Q. 16. In which countries the participation of women in
public life is very high ?
Ans. Scandinavian Countries.
1
Q. 17. How many times was the Belgium constitution
amended between 1970 and 1993 ?
Ans. Four.
1
Q. 18. Which group of countries surrounds Belguim ?
Ans. Germany,
France,
the
Netherlands
and
Luxemberg.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Describe the power sharing arrangement made by
Belgium ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		Explain any three elements of the Belgium model
of power sharing.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. The main elements of the Belgium model of powersharing includes :
(a) Constitution prescribes that the number of Dutch
and French speaking ministers shall be equal in
the central government. Some special laws require
the support of majority of members from each
linguistic group. Thus, no single community can
make decisions unilaterally.
(b) Many powers of the central government have been
given to state governments of the two regions
of the country. The state governments are not
subordinate to the central government.
(c) Brussels had a separate government in which
both the communities have equal representation.
The French speaking people accepted equal
representation in Brussels because the Dutchspeaking community has accepted equal
representation in the central government. 1×3=3
Q. 2. Describe any three majoritarian measures adopted
by the Srilankan Government to establish Sinhala
supremacy. [Board Term 1, 2013 (H3), 2012 (37)]
Or
		Describe any three provisions of the Act which
was passed in Sri Lanka in 1956 to establish
Sinhala supremacy.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]
Or
		Why did the Srilankan Tamils feel alienated in
spite of their long stay in Sri Lanka ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]
Or
		Explain three measures taken by Sri Lanka,
according to an Act passed in 1956.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Or
		Which three provisions of the Act passed in Sri
Lanka in 1956 established Sinhala Supremacy ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (56)]
Or
		What were the reasons for the alienation of
Srilankan Tamils ? What was the effect of this on
the country ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (14, 37, 45), 2010 (A2)]
Or
		Why Sri Lankan Tamils felt alienated ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (34, 40)]


3 marks each
Ans. Sri Lankan Tamils felt alienated because :
(a) Government adopted majoritarian measure to
establish Sinhala Supremacy. In 1956, an Act was
passed to recognise Sinhala as the only official
language thus disregarding Tamil.
(b) The governments followed preferential politics
that favoured Sinhala applicants for university
positions and government jobs.
(c) A new constitution stipulated that the state shall
protect and foster Buddhism.
(d) Srilankan Tamils felt that none of the major
political parties by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders
were sensitive to their language and culture.
(e) As a result, the relations between the Sinhala and
Tamil communities strained overtime and it soon
turned into a civil war.
(Any three) 1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 3. Compare the different ways in which the Belgians
and the Sri Lankans have dealt with the problem
of cultural diversity.
		 [Board Term 1, 2012 (52), 2011 (12, 13, 23, 32, 33)]
Ans.		The Belgian leaders recognised the existence of
regional and cultural diversities.
(a) They amended their constitution four times
so as to work out an innovative arrangement
that would enable everyone to live together in
peace and harmony, i.e., there was sharing of
power between the Dutch and the French both
in the central government; state government and
community government. They followed a policy
of accommodation.
(b) This helped to avoid civic strife and division of
the country on linguistic lines.
(c) On the other hand, the Sinhalese who were
in majority in Sri Lanka as compared to the
Tamils followed a policy of majoritarianism and
adopted a series of measures to establish Sinhala
supremacy by passing an Act of 1956.
These measures alienated the Tamils leading to
civic strife between the two communities.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 4. Explain any three consequences of the majoritarian
policies adopted by the Sri Lankan government.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (48)]
Ans. Consequences of majoritarian policies adopted
by Sri Lankan Government were :
(a) Tamils felt the government was not sensitive
about Tamil language and culture because
Sinhala was declared the official language.

[ 103

POWER SHARING

(b)

Tamils felt discriminated against securing jobs
and education which were given preferentially to
the Sinhala speakers.
(c) Tamils felt the government was practising
religious discrimination because the State
fostered Buddhism. Relations between Tamils
and Sinhalese became strained.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 5. Mention any three demands of Srilankan
Tamils ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (63)]

Or
		Which three demands of the Srilankan Tamils
accepted and met with, can settle the ethnic
conflict in Sri Lanka for good ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
Ans. Demands of the Tamils :
(a) Recognition of Tamil as an official language.
(b) Equal opportunities for Tamils in government
jobs and educational institutions.
(c) Provincial autonomy for Tamil dominated
provinces. (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. How majoritarianism has increased the feeling of
alienation among the Sri Lanka Tamils ? Explain.		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC), (R9UJGYG)]

5 marks each
Ans. Ans. Sri Lankan Tamils felt alienated because :
(a) Government adopted majoritarian measure to
establish Sinhala Supremacy. In 1956, an Act was
passed to recognise Sinhala as the only official
language thus disregarding Tamil.
(b) The governments followed preferential politics
that favoured Sinhala applicants for university
positions and government jobs.
(c) A new constitution stipulated that the state shall
protect and foster Buddhism.
(d) Srilankan Tamils felt that none of the major
political parties by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders
were sensitive to their language and culture.
(e) As a result, the relations between the Sinhala and
Tamil communities strained overtime and it soon
turned into a civil war.

TOPIC-2

Accomodation in Belgium Forms of Power
Sharing
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which type of powers does the community
government of Belgium enjoy ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. This government has the power regarding culture,
education and language related issues.
1
Q. 2. What is the Prudential reason behind power
sharing ?
			 [Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (WQ7FXWC)]
Or
		Why power sharing is good for democracies ?
Ans. It reduces the possibility of conflict between social
groups.
1
Q. 3. Which system of power sharing is called, ‘Checks
and Balances’ ?
Ans. Horizontal distribution of powers.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Give reasons why power sharing is desirable.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set 6AP67LB]
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (A2)]
Or
		Why power sharing is necessary in democracy ?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (22, 25, 31, 11)]
Or
		Write one Prudential and one moral reason for
power sharing.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (16, 11)]
Or
		Why is power sharing desirable ? Explain moral
reasons in this regard. [Board Term 1, 2012 (64)]
Or
		Why power sharing is desirable ? Explain giving
any three prudential reasons.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Ans. Power sharing is desirable in democracy because :
(i) Prudential reasons :

1 mark each


3 marks each
		
(a)		It helps to reduce the possibility of conflict
between social groups. Since social conflict
often leads to violence and political instability.
		
(b)		It is a good way to ensure the stability of
political order.
		
(c)		Imposing the will of majority, community
over others may look like an attractive
option in the short run, but in the long run it
undermines the unity of the nation.
(ii) Moral reasons :
		
(a)		Power sharing is the very spirit of democracy.
A democratic rule involves sharing power
with those affected by its exercise and who
have to live with its effect.
		
(b)		People have a right to be consulted on how
they are to be governed.
		
(c)		 A legitimate government is one where citizens
through participation, acquire a stake in the
system.
1½+1½=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015, 2012)

104 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 2. How can power be shared among governments at
different levels ? Explain.		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Or
		Explain the vertical division of power giving
example from India.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36)]
Ans.		Vertical division of power : Vertical division
of power means sharing of power among
governments at different levels. In India, there
are three levels of the government :
(a) For entire country : Central Government/Union
Government.
(b) At the provincial level : State Governments.
(c) At the local level (i.e., rural and urban) : Local
self governments like panchayats and municipal
councils.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 3. What is power sharing ? Why power sharing is
important in a democracy ?
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. (a) When the power does not rest with any one
organ of the state rather it is shared among
legislature, executive and judiciary it is called
power sharing.
(b) Power sharing is important in a democracy because :
(i) It helps to reduce the possibility of conflict
between social groups.
(ii) It is the very spirit of democracy.
(iii) It is a good way to ensure the stability of the
political order.
(Any two) 1+2=3
Q. 4. “Sharing of powers makes a country more
powerful and united.’’ Do you agree with this
statement and why ?
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
Or
		“Power-sharing is the very spirit of democracy”.
Justify this statement with three suitable points.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (39)]
Or
		How far do you agree with the statement that
power sharing is keeping with the “Spirit” of
democracy ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans. Power sharing keeps up with the ‘Spirit’ of
Democracy as :
(a) Power sharing ensures that all people have stake
in government.
(b) Power sharing ensures maximum participation.
It upholds the concept of people’s rule. It always
brings better outcomes in democracy. It ensures
the political stability in democracy.
(c) Power sharing accommodates diverse groups. It
helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between
social groups.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 5. “Both Belgium and Sri Lanka are democracies but
they follow different systems of power sharing”.
Support the statement by giving three points of
difference.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (69)]

Ans. Difference in power sharing of Belgium and Sri
Lanka :
(a) In Belgium, the government does not follow
preferential policies in matters of jobs and
education. In Sri Lanka, the government follows
preferential policies in matters of government,
jobs and education.
(b) In Belgium, there is a special government
called ‘community government’ to look after
the cultural, educational and language related
issues. In Sri Lanka, the major political parties are
not sensitive to the language and culture of the
Tamils.
(c) In Belgium, there is no discrimination between
different religions. In Sri Lanka, Buddhism is the
official religion.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 6. Describe horizontal and vertical power sharing in
modern democracies.
Or
		Differentiate between horizontal and vertical
division of powers. [Board Term 1, 2011 (18, 36)]
Or
		What is horizontal distribution of power ?
Mention its any two advantages.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Or
		Why is horizontal distribution of power often
referred to as a system of ‘checks and balances’ ?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (67, 70)]
Ans.
Horizontal division
of power

Vertical division of
power

(a) Horizontal division
of power is such
a power sharing
arrangement
in
which power is
shared
among
different organs of
government, such as
legislature, executive
and judiciary.

In vertical division of
powers, power can
be shared among
governments
at
different levels, like
union, state and local
levels of government,
i.e., it involves higher
and lower levels of
the government.

(b) In
horizontal
division of power,
different organs of
government exercise
different
powers.
This is a concept of
separation of powers.

In vertical division of
powers, constitution
clearly lays down
the
power
of
different levels of he
government.

( c ) Horizontal
distribution specifies
the
concept
of
checks and balances
in order to check the
exercise of unlimited
powers
of
the
organs.

There is no concept
of
checks
and
balances,
because
powers are clearly
given
by
the
constitution
from
the higher level to
the lower level.
1×3=3

[ 105

POWER SHARING

		Advantages of horizontal distribution of power :
(i) It allows different organs of government placed at
the same level to exercise different powers.
(ii) It ensures that none of the organs can exercise
unlimited power. Each organ checks the other.
Q. 7. In modern democracies, power is often shared
among different organs of the government.
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (29, 35, 42)]
Or
		Explain how power is shared among different
organs of the government.
Ans.		Power is shared between different organs of the
government such as Legislature, Executive and
Judiciary. This system of power sharing is referred
to as a system of ‘checks and balances’ because :
(a) All three organs are placed at the same level of
power.
(b) The power distribution ensures that no organ
enjoys unlimited powers.
(c) Each organ exercises a check on the others. Thus
there is a balance of power.
(Any two)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Detailed Answer :
		
Power is shared among different organs of
government as Legislature, Executive and Judiciary.

(a)

Legislature : The legislature is concerned with
passing the laws, controlling the finances of the
state and delivering on matter of public importance.
(b) Executive : The executive machinery implements
the policies of the government and executes the
rules made by the legislature bodies.
(c) Judiciary : The judiciary is concerned with the
interpretation of the laws and has the power to
punish those who commit crimes or break the
laws. The judiciary can also check the functioning
of executives.
1×3=3
Q. 8. “The outcome of politics of social divisions
depends on how the political leaders raise
the demands of any community”. Explain the
statement.
Ans. (a) It is easy to accommodate demands that are
within the constitutional framework and are not at
the cost of another community.
(b) The demand for only the Sinhala community in
Sri Lanka was at the cost of interest and identity of
Tamil community.
(c) In Yugoslavia, the leaders of the different ethnic
communities presented their demands in such a
way that these could not be accommodated within
a single country.
1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 2. Explain how Belgium was able to solve its ethnic
problem ?
[NCERT; OD 2010 (I, II, III)]
Or
		
Explain the power sharing arrangement in
Belgium.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (17)]
Or
		State the main elements of the power sharing
model evolved in Belgium.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (20, 27, 40)]
Ans. The main elements of the power-sharing model
evolved in Belgium were :
(a) Constitution prescribes that the number of Dutch
and French speaking ministers shall be equal in the
Central Government. Some special laws require
the support of majority of members from each
linguistic group. Thus, no single community can
make decisions unilaterally.

5 marks each
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

Many powers of the central government have been
given to state governments of the two regions
of the country. The state governments are not
subordinated to the central government.
Brussels had a separate government in which
both the communities have equal representation.
The French-speaking people accepted equal
representation in Brussels because the Dutchspeaking community has accepted equal
representation in the central government.
Apart from the central and the state government,
there is a third kind of government called the
Community government.
This community government is elected by people
belonging to one language community—Dutch,
French and German speaking. This government
has the power regarding cultural, educational and
language related issues.
1×5=5



2

CHAPTER

FEDERALISM

¾¾ How has federal division of power in India help national unity ?
¾¾ To what extent has decentralization achieved this objective ?

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

QUICK REVIEW
zz

The sharing of power among the central government, state,
regional and local governments is known as federalism.

zz

In the federal form of government there is a clear cut division
of powers between the centre and the states.

zz

In this form, there is an independent judiciary to decide
disputes between governments of the two levels.

zz

Argentina, Austria, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Germany, India, Mexico, Switzerland and the United States
have federal governments.

zz

Some units of the Indian Union are smaller in size in comparison to other states and cannot be merged
with other states. Such units are known as Union Territories.

zz

In India there are seven Union Territories.

zz

The process of dispersing or distributing decision-making power to the smaller units is known as
decentralization.

zz

When there is only one level of government, it is known as Unitary Government and the system is called
Unitary System.

zz

A set of rules which determines the form of the government, the powers of the government, the rights of
the citizens, and the relation between the government and its citizen is known as constitution.

zz

Division of power between the centre and the states is an essential feature of the federal type of government.

zz

An association of independent states formed for some particular purpose is known as a confederation.

zz

The matters of national importance upon which the central government takes decisions are included in
the Union List.

zz

The matters of state and local level importance on which the decisions are taken by the state governments
are included in the State List.

zz

The matters which have common importance to both the central and the state governments are included
in the Concurrent List.

zz

The powers which are not included in the Union, State and Concurrent lists are known as residual powers.
These powers lie with the centre.

zz

In India federalism is practiced through the creation of linguistic states, adoption of a secular language
policy and restructuring the centre- state relations.

zz

When no single party gets a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, the major national parties inter into an
alliance with many parties including several regional parties to form a government at the center. This is
known as COALITION government.

TOPIC - 1
What is Federalism & What Makes
India a Federal Country ? .... P. 108
TOPIC - 2
How is federalism practiced
Decentralisation in India .... P. 110

[ 107

FEDERALISM

KNOW THE TERMS
zzFederalism

: It is a system of government in which the power is divided between a central authority and various
constituent units of the country.
zzDecentralisation : When the power is taken away from central and state governments and given to the local
government, it is called decentralisation.
zzJurisdiction : The area over which someone has legal authority.
zzUnion List : It includes subjects of national importance. The central government alone can make decisions on these
matters such as defence of the nation, foreign affairs, finance and communication.
zzState List : It includes matters of state level importance. The state government alone can make decisions on these
areas. They include matters such as police, trade, agriculture, commerce and irrigation.
zzConcurrent List : It includes those subjects which are of common interest of both the central and state governments.
It includes matters such as education, forest, marriage, adoption and succession and trade unions. Both the state
and central governments can make decisions on these matters.
zz‘Coming together’ Federation : It is a federation in which several independent states come together on their own
to form a bigger unit, so that by pooling sovereignty and retaining identity, they can increase their security.
zz‘Holding together’ Federation : It is a federation in which a large country decides to divide its power between the
constituent states and the national government.
zzResiduary Subjects : Subjects which do not fall in any of these three lists. New subjects such as computer software
that came up after the constitution was made comes under residuary subjects.
zzUnitary System : It is a system of government in which either there is only one level of government or the subunits are subordinate to the central government.
zzLanguage Policy : It is the safeguard to other languages. Under this policy, besides Hindi, 21 other languages are
recognised as Scheduled Languages by the constitution.
zzScheduled Languages : 22 Languages which are listed in the Eighth Schedule of the constitution are known as the
Scheduled languages.
zzUnion Territories : These territories do not have the powers of state and come under direct rule of central or Union
government. For example— Chandigarh, Lakshadweep etc.
zzRegionalism : A strong feeling of pride or loyalty in a particular region with a desire of more power to govern
themselves.
zzMayor : The Chairperson of a Municipal Corporation is known as the mayor.
zzAutonomy : A region or territory to govern itself independently.
zzLinguistic States : India is a multilingual country where people speak different languages. After independence,
some states were created on the basis of the languages people used to speak. These are known as linguistic states.
zzPanchayati Raj : A system of government in which Gram Panchayats are the basic units of administration. It has
three levels — Gram (village), Tehsil (block) and Zila (District).
zzPanchayat Samiti : It is a local government body at the tehsil or taluka level in India, which is a link between Gram
Panchayat and Zila Parishad.
zzGram Sabha : The bodies for the supervision of Gram Panchayats.
zzTier System : It is the system which signifies levels of government. It may be two levels (two tiers) and three levels
(three tiers).
zzIndian Federation : It has 29 states and 7 union territories. Its capital is New Delhi.

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Type of Government in USA
		http://www.thesocialleader.com/2010/07/american_form_government/
2. Federal and Unitary Government Comparison
		http://www.dsusd.k12.c.us/users/scottsh/Govt/Advantagesdisadvantages%20federal.html

108 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

FLOWCHART
Federalism

Union Government

State Government

Local Government

Government for
entire country

Government for
particular state/province

Government for
local level

Union List

State List

Gram Panchayat

Residuary Subjects

Block (Tehsil)
Zila Parishad
Concurrent List

TOPIC-1

What is Federalism & What Makes India a
Federal Country ?
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Name the country which follows ‘coming
together’ style of federalism.
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, DDE-2014]
Ans. USA and Australia.
(Any one) 1
Q. 2. Which subjects are included in the Union List ?		
		
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. Defence of the nation, foreign affairs, banking,
currency, communication.
1
Q. 3. Which type of government has two or more
levels ?
Ans. Federal Government.
1
Q. 4. Which subjects falls under the concurrent list ?
Ans. Marriage, education, forest, trade unions, adoption
and succession.
1
Q. 5. The subject of Computer Software comes under
which list ?
Ans. Residuary List.
1
Q. 6. In case of any dispute about the division of powers
who can make a decision ?
Ans. The High Court and the Supreme Court can make
a decision.
1
Q. 7. Which subjects are included in the state list ?
Ans. Agriculture, police, public health, land.
1
Q. 8. Which groups of countries are an example of
holding together federation ?
Ans. India, Spain and Belgium.
1
Q. 9. The federal system serves which two dual
objectives ?
Ans. First, to safeguard and promote unity of the country
and secondly, to accomodate regional diversity. 1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Highlight any three steps taken by India towards
making it a federation.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. (i) Reorganisation of states on linguistic basis.
(ii) Centre state relations.
(iii) Decentralisation or any other relevant point.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 2. Highlight three major distinctions between the
federations of ‘coming together’ type and ‘holding
together’ type.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]

1 mark each


3 marks each
Ans. Holding Together Federation :
(i) Large country decides to divide its power
between states and the centre.
(ii) Central government tends to be more powerful.
(iii) Federating units have unequal power.
(iv) India, Spain, Belgium.
Coming Together Federation :
(v) Independent states coming together on their own
to form a bigger unit.
(vi) All the states have equal power and are strong.

[ 109

FEDERALISM

(vii)

By pooling sovereignty and retaining identify,
they increase their security.
(viii) U.S.A, Switzerland, Australia.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 3
Q. 3. What are the
constitution ?

three lists given in the
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		Describe the three-fold distribution of legislative
power between the Union Government and State
Governments of India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. The three-fold distribution of legislative powers :
(i) Union list : Union lists consist of 97 subjects. It
includes subjects of national importance such as
defence of the country, foreign affairs, banking,
communication and currency.
(ii) State list : State list consists of 66 subjects. It
contains subjects of state and local importance
such as police, trade, commerce, agriculture and
irrigation.
Concurrent list : Concurrent list consist of 47
subjects It includes subjects of common interest
to both such as education, forest, trade unions,
marriage, adoption and succession.
1×3=3
Q. 4. Describe the three-tier system of Indian
federation ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (A2)]
Ans. Three-tier system means three levels of government.
The Indian constitution was originally provided for
a two-tier system of government :
The Union government or the Central government,
and
The State governments.
But, later a third-tier of federalism was added
in the form of Panchyats at rural level and
municipalities at urban level. Every level enjoys
separate jurisdiction.
1×3=3
(iii)

(a)
(b)
(c)

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why did the makers of our Constitution declare
India to be a ‘Union of states’ ? Why were some
sub-political units of India given a special status?
				
[School of Scholars, Yavatmal, 2015 ]
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46)]
Ans.		India became a Union of states because it consisted
of both British–ruled territories as well as many
princely states. Some sub-political units of India
have a special status.
(i) French and Portuguese–ruled territories were
given the status of Union territory.
(ii) Jammu & Kashmir joined India on a special
condition.
(iii) Some units were too small to become independent
states. They were made Union Territories.
(iv) States in the north-east have been given a special
status as they have a large tribal population with
a distinct history and culture.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 1+4=5
Q. 2. Explain any five key features of federalism.		
		
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		Describe the main features of federalism.
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		Enlist any five features of federalism.
				 [Board Term 1, 2013 (H3, 105), 2012 (37, 40)]
Or
		Mention any five main features which makes
India a federal country.
			 [Board Term 1, 2012 (34), 2011 (580011, 24, 35)]
Ans.		Main Features of Federalism :
(i) There are two or more levels of government.
India has three levels.
(ii) Each level of government has its own
jurisdiction in matters of legislation, taxation
and administration even though they govern the
same citizens.



5 marks each
(iii)

Power and functions of each tier of government
is specified and guaranteed by Constitution.
(iv) The Supreme Court has been given power to
settle disputes between federal governments.
(v) Fundamental provisions of Constitution cannot
be altered by any one level of government. It
applies to India also.
(vi) Sources of revenue between different levels is
specified by Constitution.
(vii) There is mutual trust and agreement between the
government at different levels. (Any five) 1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013)
Q. 3. Differentiate
between
‘Coming
Together
Federation’ and ‘Holding Together Federation’,
with examples. [Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. Difference between ‘Coming Together Federation’
and ‘Holding Together Federation’ :
(a) Coming together federation’s are formed when
independent states come together to form a bigger
state and ‘holding together federations’ are formed
when a large country decides to divide itself into
sub-units.
(b) In ‘coming together federations’ the state
governments are strong, whereas in ‘holding
together federations’, the central government is
strong.
(c) In ‘coming together federations’, all states
governments have equal powers but in ‘holding
together federations, this may not be the case.
(d) Examples of coming together federations — U.S.A.,
Switzerland and Australia.
Examples of holding together federations — India,
Spain and Belgium.
5
Q. 4. “Holding together federations” do not give
equal power to its constituent units. Explain the
statement with help of examples in context to
India.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (69)]

110 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. (a) All states in the Indian Union do not have
identical powers. For example, Jammu and
Kashmir enjoys a special status and has its own
constitution.
(b) Many provisions of the Indian Constitution do
not apply here.
(c) Indians who are not the permanent residents of
Jammu and Kashmir cannot buy land or house
there.
(d) Smaller units called Union Territories do not have
the powers of a state. The Central Government
has special powers in running these areas.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 5. What challenges did centre-state relations in
India face before the 1990’s? Why is power sharing
between centre and state more effective today ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (62)]
Or
		Describe the centre-state relations in Indian
Federalism ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580020, 33)]
Or
		
How have the centre-state relations been
restructured to strengthen federalism ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580027, 39)]
Ans.		Challenges before 1990 :
(a) Political scene was dominated by one party both
at the centre and in the states.
(b) States which had government of political parties
other than that at the centre were undermined
and harassed by the centre even by using
constitutional provisions.
		After 1990 :
(a) Now the centre and majority of state governments
belong to different political parties in coalition.
(b) A number of regional parties have become
powerful and play a crucial role at the centre and
states.
(c) The era of “coalition” government at the centre
has inculcated respect for federal autonomy.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2+3=5
Q. 6. How is a federal government different from the
unitary form of government ? Why are federations
preferred these days ? [Board Term 1, 2012 (63)]
Ans.		Difference :
(a) Unitary government has only one level of
government whereas a federal government has
two or more levels of government.

(b)

In Unitary government the, sub-units are
subordinate to the centre, whereas in a federation,
central government cannot encroach on the
rights of state governments.
(c) In unitary system, centre can order the sub-units
which cannot happen in federation.
A Federation is preferred because :
(a) It helps in making administration effective and
efficient.
(b) It helps to accommodate all diverse groups.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3+2=5
Q. 7. How are the powers divided between the states
and centre? Explain with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (74)]
Or
		Describe the three-fold distribution of legislative
powers between the Union Government and State
governments of India. [Board Term 1, 2012 (80)]
Or
		Describe the three-fold distribution of legislative
powers between the Union government and the
State governments. Who can make laws on the
subjects which are not covered under these lists
and what name has been given to such subjects ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580014)]
Or
		Describe the division of powers between the
Central and the State Governments in India.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580029, 36, 45)]
Ans.		The three-fold distribution of legislative powers :
(a) Union list : Union lists consist of 97 subjects. It
includes subjects of National importance such as
defence of the country, foreign affairs, banking,
communication and currency.
(b) State list : State list consists of 66 subjects. It
contains subjects of state and local importance
such as police, trade, commerce, agriculture and
irrigation.
(c) Concurrent list : Concurrent list consists of 47
subjects It includes subjects of common interest
to both such as education, forest, trade unions,
marriage, adoption and succession.
Union Government can make laws on the subjects
which are not covered under these lists. The
name has been given to such subjects is residuary
subjects. (CBSE Markind Scheme 2012) 3+2=5

TOPIC-2

How is Federalism practiced Decentralisation
in India
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What status has been given to Hindi by the
Constitution of India ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]

1 mark each

Ans. Official language of the country.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1

[ 111

FEDERALISM

Q. 2. Much of the official work in Indian states is done
in which language ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015 Set-E]
Ans. Hindi.
1
Q. 3. What is the official post for the chairperson of a
Municipal Corporation ?
[School of Yavatmal, 2015]
Ans. Mayor.
1
Q. 4. Which local body has a ‘Mayor’ as its head ?
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. Municipal Corporation.
1
Q. 5. Much of the official work in Indian States is done
in which language ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. Official language of the concerned state.
1
Q. 6. By which name the rural local government is
popularly known ?
Ans.
Panchayati Raj.
1
Q. 7.
Which state in India has a special status ?
Ans.
Jammu and Kashmir.
1
Q. 8.
How many other languages are recognised as
Scheduled Languages by the constitution, besides
Hindi ?
Ans. 21.		
1
Q. 9.
The system of Panchyati Raj works at which
levels ?
Ans.
The village, block and district levels.
1
Q. 10.
Name the process where power is taken away
from Central and State governments and given to
local government.
Ans.
Decentralization.
1
Q. 11.
Which Indian state has its own constitution ?
Ans.
Jammu and Kashmir.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Do you take decentralisation as means to minimise
the conflicts ? Give your view point ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set C5JWEVD]
Ans. Yes, it helps in the settlement of a large number of
problems and issues at the local level.
l It provides a platform for the direct participation
of people in decision making.
l In another way, decentralisation in the form of
'Local Self government' is the best way to realise
principles of Democracy.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 3
Q. 2. Differentiate between Gram Sabha and Gram
Panchayat.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. Gram Panchayat is a council consisting of several
ward members often called panch, and a president
or Sarpanch. It is the decision making body for the
whose village.
The Panchayat works under the overall
supervision of the gram sabha. All the voters in
the village are its members.
1½ + 1½ = 3
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015]
Q. 3. Describe the significance of decentralisation.		
		
3 marks each
OR
		 Do you take decentralisation as means to minimise
the conflicts ? [Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOKG258]
Ans. Significance of Decentralisation :
(a) It helps in the settlement of a large number of
problems and issues at the local level.
(b) It provides a platform for the direct participation of
people in decision-making.
(c) In another way, decentralisation in the form of
‘Local self government’ is the best way to realise
principles of Democracy.
1×3=3
Q. 4. State any three differences between the local
government before and after the constitutional
Amendment in 1992.
Ans. Local Government before 1992 :
(a) It was directly under the control of the state
government.
(b) Elections were not held regularly.
(c) Elections were controlled by the state governments.
		Local Government after 1992 :
(a) Local governments have got some powers of their
own.
(b) Elections are held regularly.
(c) An independent state election commission is
responsible to conduct the elections.
½×6=3


[Board Term 1, 2011 (A2)]

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why has federalism succeeded in India ? Which
were the policies adopted by India that ensured
this success ? Explain. [Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Federalism has succeeded in India due to the
nature of democratic policies in our country.
The policies adopted by India to ensure this
success :
(i) Linguistic States : After independence, the
boundaries of several old states were changed
in order to create new states. The creation of
linguistic states was the first and a major test
for democratic politics in our country.

5 marks each
(ii) Language Policy : The second test for the
Indian federation is the language policy. The
Indian constitution did not give the status of
national language to any one of the language.
(iii) Centre-State Relations : Restructuring the
centre-state relations is one more way in which
federalism has been strengthened in practice.
(iv) Decentralisation of Power : Power in India has
been decentralised to the local government.
The local government includes Panchayats in
villages and municipalities in urban areas.

1+4=5

112 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 2. “Local government’s have made a significant
impact on Indian democracy. At the same time
there are many difficulties”. Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3), 2012 (60, 71)]
Ans.		Impact of local self government on Indian
democracy :
(a) Constitutional status for local government has
helped to deepen democracy.
(b) It has increased women’s representation and
voice in our democracy.
		Difficulties :
(a) Gram sabhas are not held regularly.
(b) Most state governments have not transferred
significant powers to local government.
(c) State governments do not provide adequate
resources. (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 2+3=5
Q. 3. Explain five changes towards decentralisation
brought in the Constitution after the Amendments
made in 1992.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Or
		What is the meaning of decentralisation ? Explain
any four provisions that have been made towards
decentralisation in India after the Constitutional
Amendment in 1992.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		Which five provisions of the Constitutional
Amendment of 1992 strengthen the third tier of
democracy in India? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36, 52)]
Or
		Explain any four provisions that have been
made towards decentralisation in India after the
Constitutional Amendment in 1992 ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580016, 32)]
Or
		What is meant by “decentralisation of powers” ?
Explain the importance of local self government
by the light of decentralization.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (53)]
Or
		How has the third tier of government in our
country been made more effective and powerful
by the constitutional amendment of 1992 ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580019)]
Or
		Describe any four Constitutional steps taken in
1992 towards decentralisation in India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580016), 2010 (A2)]
Ans.		Decentralization : When power is taken from
central and state governments and is given to
local government, it is called decentralization.
		
The Constitution was amended in 1992 to make
the third tier of democracy more powerful and
effective.
		Provisions of the Constitutional Amendment of
1992 are :
(a) Now it is mandatory to hold regular elections to
local government bodies.

(b)

Seats are reserved in the elected bodies and the
executive heads of these institutions for SC’s, ST’s
and OBC’s.
(c) At least one-third of all positions are reserved for
women.
(d) An independent institution called State Election
Commission has been created in each state to
conduct panchayat and municipal elections.
(e) The state governments are required to share some
powers and revenue with local government
bodies.
(Any four)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5
Q. 4. Analyse the advantages of decentralization.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012)]
Or
		 Explain any five advantages of decentralization of
power.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (59)]
Ans.		Advantages of Decentralization :
(a) Sharing of power between centre and states and
local government reduces conflict.
(b) Large number of problems and issues can be
best settled at local level. People have better
knowledge of problems in their localities.
(c) People have better knowledge of their own
problems.
(d) They know better on where to spend money and
how to manage things efficiently.
(e) People at the local level will participate directly in
decision making.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 5. What is the rationale for decentralization of
power? Explain the structure of Rural Local
Government in India. [Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Ans.		The basic idea behind decentralisation :
(a) Large number of problems and issues are best
settled at the local level because people have
better knowledge of their local problems.
(b) It helps in promoting direct participation.
Structure of Rural Local Government :
(a) Zila Parishad : All the mandals in a district together
constitute the Zila Parishad. Most of the members
are elected and headed by a chairperson.
(b) Panchayat Samiti or Mandal or Block : The
members of this body are elected by the entire
panchayat members in that area. A few Gram
Panchayats are grouped together to form this
government body.
(c) Gram Panchayat : A council consisting of several
ward members often called Panch. The president
is called sarpanch. It is the decision-making body
for the entire village.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2+3=5
Q. 6. Assess the need for local government.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (68)]
Ans.		Need for local government :
(a) There are a number of problems and issues that
are best settled at the local level, because people
have a better knowledge of the problems in their
localities.

[ 113

FEDERALISM

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Q. 7.

The local people are aware of their needs and can
prioritize.
It helps to initiate the process of direct decisionmaking.
It helps to inculcate the habit of democratic
participation.
Local government is the best way to realize one
important principle of democracy, namely local
self government.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
What is a Gram Sabha ? Describe any four
functions of a Gram Sabha.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (64)]

Ans.		Gram Sabha : A body comprising of all adult
members of a village or a group of villages.
		Functions of Gram Sabha :
(a) It elects the members of the Gram Panchayat.
(b) The Gram Sabha supervises the work of the
village panchayat.
(c) It approves the annual budget of the panchayat.
(d) It reviews the performance of the Gram
Panchayat.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. What qualities or values are inculcated in the
people through local government ?
Ans. Values inculcated through Local government :
(a) People become responsible when they are
entrusted with responsibilities, so it helps them to
initiate the process of direct decision-making.
(b) They learn the importance of the power of one—
which teaches that each one can make a difference
to the way in which they are governed, in the
current political scenario.
(c) They will realize the importance of their vote
and will ensure that they vote at the time of
elections, thus ensuring the habit of democratic
participation.
1×3=3
Q. 2. What values will be gained through reservation
of seats for women, SC’s, ST’s and OBC’s in the
third tier of democracy ?

3-5 marks each
Ans. Women :
(a) Women will be forced to take more active part in
local government and come out of their houses.
(b)

They can speak about problems of women and
which improve their social status.

(c)

They will become more confident and learn about
their rights.
SC’s, ST’s and OBC’s :

(a)

They will be able to participate in local government,
a right which was always denied to them in history.

(b)

Their voice cannot be suppressed. It will be heard.

(c)

They can solve issues of untouchability and other
practices of caste discrimination at the village
level.
2½+2½=5



3

CHAPTER

DEMOCRACY
AND
DIVERSITY

¾¾ Are divisions inherent to the working of democracy ?

QUICK REVIEW
The Civil Rights Movement in the USA was aimed at abolishing racial discriminations against AfricanAmericans. It was led by Martin Luther King Junior.
zz Two African-Americans, Smith and Carlos, who won the gold and bronze medals in Olympics tried to
draw the world’s attention to the racial discrimination practised against Africans in America by protesting
at the time of the medal ceremony.
zz A social difference means the difference in a group of people due to their race, religion, language or
culture.
zz When two or more social differences join together, it turns into a social division.
zz The differences between the Blacks and Whites became a social division in the U.S.
zz Democracy is a government of the people, by the people and for the people.
zz Democracy involves competition among various political parties. Their competition tends to divide any
society.
zz Three factors are crucial in deciding the outcome of politics of social decisions :
		
(i) First, the outcome depends on how people perceive their identities.
		
(ii) Second, it depends on how political leaders raise the demands of any community.
		
(iii) Third, it depends on how the government reacts to the demands of different groups.
zz In a democracy, political expression of social division is very normal and can be healthy if a positive
attitude towards diversity is kept.
zz A homogenous society is one whose residents are similar in respect of religion, culture and language.
zz The Indian society is a diverse society.
zz The Black Power Movement in the USA was started in 1966 and lasted till 1975 to end racism.
zz Afro-American is a term used to refer to those Africans whose ancestors were brought to America as slaves
between the 17th and the early 19th centuries.
zz India is the largest democratic country in the world.
zz Indian democracy is a parliamentary form of democracy.
zz The constitution of India divides power between the union and the state governments.
zz Black Power was a political movement in the late 1960s and early 1970s that aimed to express a new racial
consciousness among Blacks in the United States.
zz Shifting of people from one country to another or from one place to another in search of jobs or for other
reasons is known as migration.
zz Migration converts a homogeneous country into a heterogeneous country.

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz

KNOW THE TERMS
zz
zz
zz

Democracy : A government is framed by the representatives elected by the people. In other words,
Democracy is the government of the people, by the people and for the people.
Homogenous Society : A society that has similar kinds of people, especially where there are no significant
ethnic differences.
Migrant : Anybody who shifts from one region or a country to another region within a country or to
another country, usually for work or other economic opportunities.

[ 115

DEMOCRACY AND DIVERSITY
zzCivil

Rights Movement : It was a non-violent movement initiated by Martin Luther King Junior to fight against
racial discrimination practised in the US against African-Americans who were Blacks.
zzAfrican-American : The descendants of Africans who were brought into America as slaves between the 17th century
and the early 19th century.
zzBlack Power : The Black Power movement came into existence in 1966 and lasted till 1975. It was a militant and
racist movement advocating even violence to end racism in the US.
zzRacism : The unfair treatment of people who belong to a different race.
zzAtheist : A person who does not believe in God or religion.
zzOverlapping Differences : When some social differences overlaps with other differences, we call them overlapping
differences.
zzCross-cutting Differences : When some social differences cross cut one another they are called cross-cutting
differences.
zzMinority : Communities which are less than half of the total population of the country.
zzForum : The low courts are referred to as forums.
zzSocial Differences : Social diversity which is different from society to society.
zzDiscrimination : The practice of treating somebody or a particular group in society less-fairly than others.
zzMulticultural Community : Social community formed on the basis of different cultures is termed as multi-cultural
community. Generally, this is the result of migration.
zzSocial Division : Division of society on the basis of caste, race, religion, language, region, sex etc.
zzDisintegration : The process of breaking into small parts.

FLOWCHART
Democracy and Diversity

History shows that democracy is the best way to fight
for recognition and also to accommodate diversity.

The Civil Rights Movement for example in USA
(1954-1968) led to a series of reform movements
thus abolishing legal racial discrimination against
African-Americans.

The Black Power Movement emerging in 1966 and
lasting till 1975, was a more militant anti-racist
movement, though advocating even more violence if
necessary to end racism in the US.

Social diversities can take different forms in different
societies.

Social division takes place when some social
difference overlaps with other differences.
When social differences cross cut one another, it is
difficult to pit against one group of people against
the other. It means that groups that share a common
interest on one issue are likely to be in different
sides on a different issue.
Overlapping social differences create possibilities of
deep social divisions and tensions. Cross cutting
social differences are easier to accommodate. For
example in Northern Ireland there had been many
conflicts between Catholics and Protestants, while
they do not do so in the Netherlands.
Three factors are crucial in deciding the outcome of
politics of social divisions.
(i) It depends on how the people perceive their
identities.
(ii) It depends on how political leaders raise the
demands of any community.
(iii) It depends on how the government reacts to
demands of different groups.

116 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Black Power Salute at Mexico Olympics
		http://www.youtube.com
2. Martin Luther King
		http://www.martinlutherking.org
3. Apartheid
		http://www-cs-students.stanford.edu

Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Give one example to show Overlapping social
differences create possibilities of deep social
divisions and tensions.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. Catholics and Protestants have had conflicts in
Northern Ireland.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1
Q. 2. Highlight the case of Netherlands in reference to
cross cutting of social differences. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. In the Netherlands, class and religion tend to cut
across each other. Catholics and Protestants are
about equally likely to be poor or rich. The result
is that Catholics and Protestants have no conflicts
in Netherlands. [CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1
Q. 3. Which event in the USA is referred as the Black
Power Movement (1966-73) ?
Ans. Movement to end racism.
Q. 4. Which group of countries did face the problem of
social division ?
			
[Board Term 1, 2014, (R9UJGYG), (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. Belgium, Sri Lanka and United Kingdom.
1
Q. 5. Who are represented by the term ‘African
American’ ?
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. The descendants of Africans who were brought
into America as slaves between the 17th century
and early 19th century.
1
Q. 6. Which country suffered disintegration due to
political fights on the basis of religious and ethnic
identities ?
Ans. Yugoslavia.
1

Q. 7. Name any two elements that show the basic unity
in India ?
Ans. (i) Cultural unity; (ii) Religious equality.
1
Q. 8. List out the reasons for the growth of civil right
movement in America.
Ans. (i) Prevalance of poverty;(ii) Racial discrimination,
(iii) Civil Rights Movement;(iv) Religious diversity.
		
1
Q. 9. What does overlapping difference signify ?
Ans. Social division takes place when some social
difference overlaps with other differences.
1
Q. 10. How were Tommie Smith and John Carlos dressed
to receive their medals ?
Ans. Tommie Smith and John Carlos received their
medals wearing black socks and no shoes to
represent Black Poverty.
1
Q. 11. During which ceremony, Peter Norman, the
Australian athlete wore a human rights badge on
his shirt and why ?
Ans. During the medal ceremony of Mexico Olympics
Peter Norman, the Australian athlete wore a
human rights badge on his shirt. He did so to show
his support to the American Athletes.
1
Q. 12. Which Association took back the medals of Carlos,
Smith and Norman ?
Ans. The International Olympic Association.
1
Q. 13. Name the movement led by Martin Luther.
Ans. Civil Rights Movement.
1
Q. 14. Which movement emerged in 1966 and lasted till
1975 to end racism in the US ?
Ans. The Black Power Movement.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Explain with example the role of political leaders
to determine the outcome of politics of social
divisions.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. It depends on how political leaders raise the
demands of any community. For example :
(i) It is easier to accommodate demands that are
within the constitutional framework and are not at
the cost of another community.

1 mark each

3 marks each
(ii)

The demand for ‘only Sinhala’ was at the cost of
the interest and identity of the Tamil community
in Sri Lanka.
(iii) In Yugoslavia, the leaders of different ethnic
communities presented their demands in such a
way that these could not be accommodated within
a single country.
1×3=3
Q. 2. What steps should be taken according to you to
promote the unity among the people of India ?		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]

[ 117

DEMOCRACY AND DIVERSITY

Ans. Following steps can be undertaken to promote the
unity among the people of India :
(i) There should be equal opportunities of
representation and no sort of discrimination
existing in the society.
(ii) More and more people participation in political
affairs should be encouraged.
(iii) Full religious tolerance and the leverage to minority
group should be given to voice their opinion.
(Any other viable point) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 3. “In a democracy, every expression of social
division in politics is not disastrous.” Establish
the truth of the statement with the help of an
example.
Ans. (i) Every expression of social division in politics
does not lead to disasters because wherever social
divisions exist, they are reflected in politics.
(ii) In many countries, there are parties that focus only
on one community e.g., A.M.K, A1ADMK and BSP
in India.
1½ + 1½ = 3
Q. 4. “Attempts at forced integration often sow the
seeds of disintegration.” Support the statement
with suitable arguments.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. (i) The above statement is true from the examples
of Belgium and Sri Lanka. If the rulers are willing
to share power and accommodate the reasonable
demands of minority community, social divisions
become less threatening for the country.
(ii) But if they suppress such a demand in the name
of national unity, the end result is often quite the
opposite.
Thus with such attempts at forced integration
often saw the seeds of integration. 1½ + 1½ = 3
Q. 5. How is political expression of social division in
democracy beneficial ?
[Board Term 1, 2011
				
(580012, 13, 17, 20, 21, 24, 32, 38, 41)]
OR
		In a democracy, political expression of social
division is very normal and can be healthy. Justify
this statement with suitable arguments
(School of Yavatmal, 2015)
Ans. Every expression of social division in politics does
not lead to disasters but it is beneficial too.
(a) The various disadvantaged groups express their
grievances and get the government to attend the
same.
(b) Expression of various kinds of social divisions in
politics often result in their cancelling one another
out and thus reducing their intensity.
(c) Fight against injustice often takes a democratic
path voicing their demands in a peaceful and
consitutional manner and seeking a fair position
through elections.
1×3=3
Q. 6. Why do some people think that it’s not correct to
politicize social divisions ? Give three reasons.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. They think that it is not correct to politicize social
divisions because :

(i)

It can make social divisions into political division
and lead to conflict, violence or even disintegration
of a country.
(ii) In Northern Ireland, there has been a violent and
bitter ethno-political conflict for many years.
(iii) It caused disintegration of Yugoslavia into six
independent countries.
1×3=3
Q. 7. How is overlapping differences different from
cross-cutting differences ?
				
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. (i) Social differences which overlap other
differences are known as overlapping differences,
while when social differences cross-cut one
another, it is known as cross-cutting differences.
(ii) Cross-cutting social differences are easier to
accommodate, while overlapping differences are
not.
(iii) Overlapping social differences create possibilities
of deep social divisions and tensions, while crosscutting differences do not usually lead to conflicts.
		
1×3=3
Q. 8. What penalty was imposed on ‘Carlos Smith
and Norman’ for their action at the 1968 Mexico
Olympics ?
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		How were Carlos, Smith and Norman penalized
for their action at the 1968 Mexico Olympics ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (47)]
Ans. (a) The International Olympics Committee took
back the medals of Carlos and Smith.
(b) There was a severe criticism of Carlos and Smith in
the USA.
(c) Norman was not included in the Australian team
for the next Olympics.
1×3=3
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012)
Q. 9. Explain the two basis of social differences with
examples.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Or
		Explain with example different forms of social
differences.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580014, 35)]
Or
		Describe any three origins of social differences.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580016, 20, 22, 39)]
Ans. Different forms of social differences :
(a) Social differences are based on accident of birth.
e.g., People around us are male and female, they are
tall and short, have different kind of complexions,
or have different physical abilities or disabilities.
(b) Some differences are based on choices, e.g., some
people are atheists. They don’t believe in God
or any religion. Some people choose to follow a
religion other than the one in which they were
born.
1½+1½=3
Q. 10. Explain overlapping of social differences with an
example.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Or
		 “Overlapping social differences create possibilities
of deep social divisions and tensions”. Explain.
Ans. (a) When one social difference overlaps another
difference, it is known as overlapping of social
differences.

118 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(b)

Overlapping of social differences between Blacks
and Whites became a social division in the United
States. These differences became the main factor
for the Black Power Militant Movement.
(c) Even in India, Dalits face discrimination and
injustice. These kinds of situations produce social
divisions which are harmful for democracy and
weaken the basic foundation of democracy.
		
1½+1½=3
Q. 11. What are the three factors that determine the
outcome of social divisions on politics ? Explain.
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (105), 2012 (34)]
Or
		 Describe the factors which decide the outcomes of
the politics of social division ?
			
[Board Term 1, 2012 (46, 48, 51, 52, 60, 62, 69), 2011
		
(580018, 23, 29, 33, 34, 36, 37, 40, 43, 44)]
Ans.		Factors that determine the outcome of politics of
social divisions :
(a) As social groups view their identities to be
exclusive and superior, it becomes difficult to
accommodate them.
(b) It depends upon the type of demands raised by
the political leaders on behalf of a community. It
is easier to accomodate demands that are within
the constitutional framework and are not at the
cost of another community.
(c) Reaction of the government to the demands of
different communities determine the outcome.
If the rulers are willing to share power and
accomodate the reasonable demands of minority
community, social divisions become less
threatening for the country.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 12. Distinguish between Civil Rights Movements
(1954-1968) and The Black Power (1966-1975)
Movement in the USA. [Board Term 1, 2013, (3K)]
Ans.		Civil Rights Movement : (1954-1968)
		
Refers to a set of events and reform movements
aimed at legally abolishing racial discrimination
against African-Americans. Led by Martin Luther
King Junior, this movement practised non-violent
methods.
		The Black Power :
This Movement emerged in 1966 and lasted
till 1975, which was more militant anti-racist
movement advocating even violence if necessary
to end racism in the U.S.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1½×2=3
Q. 13. Taking the example of Carlos, Smith and Norman,
explain how social differences divide similar
people from one another but also unite very
different people.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36),
2011(58001, 15, 41), 2010 (B1)]
Ans.		Social differences divide similar people from one
another, but they also unite different people.

		
People belonging to different social groups share
differences and similarities cutting across the
boundaries of their groups. People belonging to
the same religion may feel different. Yet people
from different religions may have similar views,
e.g.,
(a) Carlos and Smith were similar in one way because
both were African-Americans and thus different
from Norman who was white.
(b) But they were all similar in other way that
they were all athletes who stood against racial
discrimination.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Q. 14. What did the African-American athletes do in
order to draw international attention to “black
poverty” in the Mexico Olmpic ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]
Or
		What were the black gloved and raised clenched
fists meant to ? Why did athletes do so ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (74)]
Or
		What problem was raised by Smith and Carlos
of U.S.A. ? With what gesture did they draw
international attention towards the social
problems in U.S.A. ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (81)]
Or
		How did the African-American athletes in Mexico
Olympics 1968 try to draw international attention
to racial discrimination in the United States ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37)]
Or
		
What did the African-American athletes in
Mexico Olympic do in order to draw international
attention to racial discrimination in the United
States ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580014, 33)]
Ans.		To draw international attention to racial
discrimination in the United States, the AfricanAmerican athletes performed following activities :
(a) They received their models wearing black socks
and no shoes to represent Black poverty.
(b) When American national anthem was played,
these two African-American athletes stood with
clenched fists upraised and heads bowed.
(c) The black gloved and raised clenched fists were
meant to symbolise black power.
(d) Peter wore a human rights badge on his shirt to
show his support.
(Any three)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 15. Who was the leader of the Civil Rights
Movement ? Describe the importance of this
movement.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (53, 56)]
Or
		Explain briefly the Civil Rights Movement which
took place in the U.S.A. between 1954 and 1968.		
		 [Board Term 1, 2011 (580018, 23, 34, 40, 44)]
Ans.		Martin Luther King Junior was the leader of the
Civil Rights Movement. This movement was
started in 1954 and lasted till 1968.

[ 119

DEMOCRACY AND DIVERSITY

		Importance of Civil Rights Movement :
(a) It was a reform movement with the aim to abolish
legal racial discrimination against AfricanAmericans.
(b) It practised non-violent methods of civil
disobedience.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+2=3
Q. 16. How do social division affect politics ? Give two
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580011)]
Or
		Explain with examples how social division affect
politics ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580038, 42)]
Or
		How do social divisions affect politics ? Explain.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Ans.		Social divisions affect politics in both negative
and positive ways :
		Negative ways :
(a) In Northern Ireland, there has been a violent
and bitter ethno-political conflict for many years.
Northern Ireland population was divided into
Protestant (53%) and Roman Catholics (44%). The
Catholics were represented by Nationalist parties
who wanted to be unified with the Republic of
Ireland. In contrast Protestants were represented
by Unionists who wanted to remain with the
U.K. Hundreds of civilians, militants and security
forces were killed in the fight between unionists
and nationalists.
(b) Disintegration of Yugoslavia into six independent
countries due to ethnic and religious differences
is another example.
Positive ways :
(a) Every expression of social division in politics does
not lead to disasters because wherever social
divisions exist, they are reflected in politics. In
many countries, there are parties that focus only
on one community, e.g., D.M.K., AIADMK and
BSP in India.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1½+1½=3
Q. 17. “We have different identities in different
contexts.” Support the statement with three facts.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012, 15)]

Ans. We have different identities in different contexts. It
can be proved by the following points :
(a)

It is fairly common for people belonging to the
same religions to feel that they do not belong to the
same community because their caste is different.

(b)

It is also possible for people from different religions
to have the same caste and feel close to each other.

(c)

Rich and poor persons from same family often do
not keep close relations with each other for they
feel they are different.
1×3=3

Q. 18. What are the features of a homogeneous society ?
Mention the name of any one country having such
society ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (280013, 21, 42)]
Ans. Features of a homogeneous society :
(a)

A society has similar kinds of people.

(b)

There are no significant ethnic differences.
Germany and Sweden

have homogenous
societies.

Q. 19. What was the Black Power Movement ? Explain. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580016, 22, 32, 43)]
Ans. (a) The black power movement was emerged in
USA between 1966 and lasted till 1975.
(b)

It was more militant and anti-racist movement.

(c)

Main aim of this movement was to end racism in
the U.S.
1×3=3

Q. 20. “Social divisions exist in most of the countries.”
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580017, 35, 37)]
Ans. Social division of one kind or the other exists in
most of the countries.
(a)

Social divisions exist whether the country is
big or small. India is a vast country with many
communities. Belgium is a small country with
many communities.

(b)

Countries such as Germany and Sweden, that were
once highly homogeneous are undergoing rapid
change with influx of people from other parts of
the world.

(c)

Migrants bring with them their own culture and
tend to form a different social community. In
this sense, most countries of the world are multicultural and as much have social division. 1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Politics and social divisions must not be allowed
to mix. Substantiate this statement, with five
arguments. [Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]


5 marks each
(ii)

(iii)
Ans. (i) Democracy involves competition among
various political parties. Their competition tends
to divide any society. If they start competing in
terms of some existing social divisions, it can
make social division into political division and
lead to conflict, violence or even disintegration of
a country.


Hundreds of civilians, militants and security
forces were killed in the fight between Unionists
and Nationalists and between the security
forces of the UK and the Nationalists. It was
only in 1998, that the UK government and the
Nationalists reached a peace treaty after which
the nationalists suspended their armed struggle.
Political competition along religious and ethnic
lines led to the disintegration of Yugoslavia into
six independent countries.

120 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(iv)

In a democracy it is only natural that political
parties would talk about the social divisions, make
different promises to different communities, look
after due representation of various communities
and make policies to redress the grievances of the
disadvantaged communities.
(v) Social divisions affect voting in most countries.
People from one community tens to prefer some
party to others. In many countries, there are
parties that focus only on one community.
		
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 5

Q. 2. ‘Social diversity in a country need not be seen as a
source of danger’. Prove.
Ans. Social diversity in a country need not be seen as a
source of danger because :
		
(a) In a democracy, political expression of social
divisions is very normal and can be healthy.
		
(b) It allows various disadvantages and marginal
social groups to express their grievances and
get the government to attend to these aspects.
		
(c) Expression of various kinds of social divisions
in politics often results in their cancelling one
another out.

		
(d) This cancelling reduces the intensity of the
different social divisions.
		
(e) This leads to strengthening of a democracy.
		
		
1×5=5
Q. 3. Describe the problems faced by a democracy to
accomodate social diversities.
Ans. Problems faced by a democracy to accomodate
social diversities are as follows :
		
(a) A positive attitude towards diversity and a
willingness to accommodate it do not come
about easily.
		
(b) People who feel marginalized, deprived and
discriminated have to fight against the injustice.
		
(c) Such a fight often takes the democratic path,
voicing their demands in a peaceful and
constitutional manner and seeking a fair
position through elections.
		
(d) Sometimes social differences can take the form
of unacceptable level of social inequality and
injustice.
		
(e) The struggle against such inequalities
sometimes takes the path of violence and
difference of state power.
1×5=5

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. Do you think that social divisions are always
dangerous ? Explain.
				

[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]

Ans. No, we do not think that social divisions are
always dangerous because :
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

In a democracy, political expression of social
divisions is normal and can be healthy.
It allows various disadvantaged and marginal
social groups to express their grievances and get
the government to attend to these.
Expression of various kinds of social division in
politics often results in their cancelling one another
out.
1×3=3

3-5 marks each
Q. 2. What lessons have been learnt from the Civil
Rights Movement of Martin Luther King in the
USA ?
Ans. (a) People learnt that issues such as discrimination
on the basis of colour existed in many regions of
the world and especially in the USA.
(b) The issue of equality was much discussed and it
was realized that equality is a dream for many
sections of society in different countries with
parallel problems.
(c) People learnt that through a non-violent protest it
was possible to highlight a social problem and find
solutions for the same.
(d) It is only in a democracy that disadvantaged
sections of society are able to highlight their
problems and find solutions.
1¼×4=5

HOTS Questions

3-5 marks each
community. It is easier to accommodate demands
that are within the constitutional framework and
are not at the cost of another community.

Q. 1. Identify the determinants of the outcomes of the
politics of social division and explain them.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. The three determinants of the outcomes of the
politics of social divison :
(i)

People’s perception : If people view their identities
to be exclusive and superior, it becomes difficult to
accommodate them.

(ii)

Role of community and culture : It depends upon
how political leaders raise demands on behalf of a

(iii)

The role of political parth and government :
Reaction of the government to the demands
of different communities also determines the
outcome. If the rulers are willing to share power
and accomodate the reasonable demands of a
minority community, social divisions become less
threating for the country.
5



4

CHAPTER

GENDER,
RELIGION
AND CASTE

¾¾ What has been the effect of caste on politics and of politics on caste ?
¾¾ How has the gender division shaped policies ?
¾¾ How do communal divisions affect democracy ?

QUICK REVIEW
zz
zz
zz
zz

zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

Gender division is a form of social division which can
be seen everywhere.
TOPIC - 1
Sexual division of labour means the work is divided
Gender and Politics .... p. 123
amongst people according to their sex.
TOPIC - 2
Social division of the Indian society is clearly indicated
Religion, Communalism and Politics .... p. 125
by casteism, gender inequality and communal divisions.
A feeling under which a person considers the people of
TOPIC - 3
his own community to be his friends but those of other
Caste and Politics .... p. 127
religions to be his enemies is known as communalism.
A behaviour which inspires the high caste people to
hate the lower caste people is known as casteism.
A man or a woman who believes in equal rights and opportunities for men and women is called a feminist.
Secularism implies religious freedom, right to speak and right to accept any religion.
Most of the women’s movements aim at equality in personal and family life of women. These movements
are called feminist movements.
Indian democracy faces the problem of casteism, communalism, illiteracy, unemployment and poverty.
Communities having a relatively small population in a society are called minorities.
A system of separate electorate and representation for people belonging to different communities is
known as communal representation.
The laws that deal with family-related matters, such as marriage, divorce etc. are known as family laws.
Buddhism is the major religion of Sri Lanka and Hinduism is the major religion of Nepal.
The use of religion in politics is known as communal politics.
Sweden, Norway and Finland have high women participation in public life.
Gandhiji was against untouchability.
Jyotiba Phule, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Mahatma Gandhi and Periyar Ramaswami Naicker worked to end the
caste system in India.

KNOW THE TERMS
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz
zz

Gender Division : It is a form of hierarchical social division based on social expectations and stereotypes.
Sex Ratio : It is defined as number of females per 1000 male in a country in a given period of time.
Communal Politics : The use of religion for political purpose where one religion is shown as superior to
the other religions is called communal politics.
Sexual Division of Labour : A system in which all work inside the home is either done by the women of
the family, or organised by them through the domestic helpers.
Feminist : A person who believes in equal rights and opportunities for all human beings.
Patriarchy : A system where father is the head of the family.
Stereotype : An image or idea of a particular type of person or thing that has become fixed through being
widely held.

122 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

zzCommunalism

: It means attempts to promote religious ideas between groups of people as identified as different
communities.
zzFamily Laws : The laws that deal with family related matters such as marriage, divorce, adoption, inheritance etc.
In our country, different family laws apply to followers of different religions.
zzLiteracy Rate : Literacy rate is the ratio of educated people among the whole population of a country.
zzPrejudice : An unreasonable dislike or preference for a person, group, custom etc. especially when it is based on
their race, religion, sex etc.
zzSecular State : A state which does not have any official religion. It provides equal status to all religions.
zzUrbanisation : Shift of population from rural areas to urban areas.
zzFeminism : It is concerned with the empowerment of women and giving women equal status in the society as men.
zzCasteism : Casteism is the hereditary system of occupation, political power, endogamy, social culture and social class.
zzSecularism : A belief that religion should not be involved in the organisation of society.
zzDalits : The Scheduled Castes (SCs) are commonly known as Dalits.
zzAdivasis : The Scheduled Tribes (STs) are known as Adivasis.
zzCaste Hierarchy : A ladder like formation in which all the caste groups are placed from the highest to the lowest castes.
zzElectorate : All the people in a country or area who are entitled to vote in an election.
zzUniversal Adult Franchise : It means that all citizens whose age is above 18 years have the right to vote.

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Political Participation of Women in India
		http://www.icrw.org/files/publications/India%20governance%20report%20synthesis%202013.pdf
2. Communalism and Politics
		http://communalism.blogspot.in/2004/01/.india-communalism-and-political-issues.html
3. Caste and Politics
		http://www.halfmantr.com/display-national-issues/1080-caste-and-politics.

FLOWCHART
Gender, Religion and Politics

Gender and Politics

Religion and Politics

Caste and Politics

Gender division or a form of
hierarchical division exists in India.

Gandhiji said that politics must be
guided by ethics drawn from religion.

Sexual division of labour exists in
many Indian homes even now.

Problem begins when religion is
seen as the basis of nation.

With economic development, large
scale urbanization, growth of literacy
and education, occupational mobility
and the weakening position of
landlords in the villages; the old
notions of caste hierarchy are
breaking down.

Gender discrimination in all spheres
of life has given rise to Feminist
Movement.

Communal politics is based on the
idea that religion is the principal
basis of social community.

To curb the low proportion of women
participation in Indian legislature,
1/3rd of seats in Panchayats and
Municipalities are now reserved for
women.

Yet the influence of caste on politics
and vice versa has not disappeared
in India.

[ 123

GENDER, RELIGION AND CASTE

TOPIC-1

Gender and Politics
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. At which level of government in India 1/3 of seats
are reserved for women ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. Local self Government bodies.
1
Q. 2. By what term is now the person known who
believes in equal rights and opportunities for
women.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOKQ2SB]
OR
		Define a feminist ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. Feminism : The movement concerned with the
empowerment of women and giving women equal
status in the society as men.
1
Q. 3. In which constitutional institution have seats
been reserved for women ?
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014, DDE-2014]
Ans. Panchayats and Municipalities.
1
Q. 4. The concept of patriarchy refers to which system ?
Ans. A system that values men more than women.
1

1 mark each

Q. 5. What is the aim of ‘feminist movements’ ?
Ans. Equality with men.
1
Q. 6. According to the 2001 census, what was the sex
ratio in India ?
Ans. 1000 males over 933 females.
1
Q. 7. In which country is the participation of women in
public life very high ?
Ans. Sweden.
1
Q. 8. What is the literacy rate amount the Indian
women ?
Ans. 54%.
1
Q. 9. What do you mean by a patriarchal society ?
Ans. A male dominated society.
1
Q. 10. Name the group of countries in which participation
of women in public life is very high.
Ans. Sweden, Norway and Finland.
1
Q. 11. How much representation do local governments
provide for women in India ?
Ans. Women have one-third seats reserved in local selfgovernment bodies.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Suppose a politician seeks your vote on the
religious ground. Why is his act considered
against the norms of democracy ? Explain.
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. His act is against the spirit of democracy as the said
politician is not working as per the Constitution.
(i) It also exploits the social difference.

3 marks each
in panchayats and in municipalities are now
reserved for women.
1×3=3
Q. 3. Explain the status of women’s representation in
India’s legislative bodies.
				

[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]

Ans. The status of women’s representation in India’s
legislative bodies are as follows :

(ii) It may create social discard and may lead to social
division.

(i)

Central Legislature : Less than 10% of its total
strength are women.

(iii) It is also biased attitude and neglects the principle
of equality.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 3

(ii)

State legislatures : Less than 5% of their total
strength are women.

Q. 2. Suggest any three measures to enhance the
participation of woman in politics ?
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]

(iii)

Panchayati Raj : One-third of the seats are reserved
for women.
1×3=3

Ans. (i) Women should be given proper education,
so that she is aware of her rights and duties and
participate actively in all political occasions.
(ii)

(iii)

Every woman should be self reliant, so that she
enjoys a respectable position in the society and is
confident about her meaningful contribution in
politics as well.
It should be legally binding to have a fair
proportion of woman in the elected bodies. That
is why 1/3 rd of seats in local government bodies

Q. 4. Define feminist movements. Write their
objectives.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580014, 20, 26)]
Ans. Definition : Agitations or movements demanding
enhancement in the political and legal status of
women and improving their education and career
opportunities are called feminist movement.
		Main Objective : The main objective of feminist
movement is to attain equality among men and
women.
1½+1½=3

124 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What was the Feminist Movement ? Explain the
political demands of the Feminist Movement in
India.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
				

[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]

Ans.		Feminist movement was a radical movement
which demanded equality for women in personal
and family life also apart from politics, society and
educational field.
		 The political demands of Feminist movements in
India were :
(a) More women representatives in local government.
(b) More political representatives for women by
having elected women representatives.
(c) Reserving at least one-third of the seats in Lok
Sabha and Legislative Assemblies for women.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015) 2+3=5
Q. 2. Examine the standard of women’s representation
in India’s legislative bodies.
				

[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Or

		Assess the status of women’s representation in
India’s legislative bodies.[Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Ans.		The status of women’s representation in India’s
legislative bodies is as follows :
(a) Central Legislature : Less than 10% of its total
strength are women.
(b) State Legislature : Less than 5% of its total
strength are women.
(c) Panchayati Raj : One-third of the seats are
reserved for women.
(d) India is among the bottom group of nations in the
world, in this aspect.
(e) Women’s organizations and activists have been
demanding a similar reservation of atleast onethird of seats in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies.
But the bill to this effect has not been passed.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 3. Describe any five ways in which women in India
are still discriminated and oppressed.
				

[Board Term 1, 2013 (10S), 2012 (33)]
Or

		“In our country, women still lag much behind
than men despite some improvements since
independence.” Support the statement by giving
five reasons. [Board Term 1, 2011 (580017, 31, 40)]
Or
		Explain with five examples that women are still
discriminated in India.
				

[Board Term 1, 2011 (580021, 27)]

5 marks each
Or
		How “Women in India still face discrimination
and oppression in various ways”. Support the
statement with five examples.
				

[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or

		What are the problems faced by Indian women
which affect their social status? Explain any five.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (47)]
Ans.		In our country, women still lag much behind men
despite some improvements since Independence.
Women face disadvantage, discrimination and
oppression in various ways :
(a) The literacy rate among women is only 54 percent
as compared with 76 percent among men.
(b) Similarly, a smaller proportion of girl students go
for higher studies. Girls are performing as well as
boys in school. But they drop out because parents
prefer to spend their resources for their boys
education rather than spending equally on their
sons and daughters.
(c) The proportion of women among the highly paid
and valued jobs is still very small. On an average
an Indian women works one hour more than an
average man everyday.
(d) The Equal Wages Act provides that equal wages
should be paid to equal work. However in almost
all areas of work, from sports and cinema, to
factories and fields, women are paid less than
men, even when both do exactly the same work.
(e) In many parts of India, parents prefer to have
sons and find ways to have the girl child aborted
before she is born. Such sex selective abortion led
to a decline in child sex ratio.
(f) Women face harassment, exploitation and
violence on the domestic front.
(Any five)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×5=5
Q. 4. What is sexual division of labour ? Mention
the main demands of the worldwide women’s
agitations ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Ans.		Sexual division of labour means division of
work on the basis of the gender difference and
according to this concept, all house work and
responsibility of bringing up children is women’s
work.
Women all over the world have been demanding :
(a) Equal voting rights.
(b) Enhancement of political and legal status of
women.
(c) Improvement of educational and career
opportunities for women.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2+3=5

[ 125

GENDER, RELIGION AND CASTE

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. “Gender division is not based on Biology but on
social expectations and stereotypes.” Support the
statement.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
			 [Board Term 1, DDE-2014, 2013 (3K), 2012 (52)]
Ans. (i) Gender division is a form of hierarchical
social division based on social expectation and
stereotypes.
(ii) Boys and girls are brought up to believe that the
main responsibility of women is house work and
bringing up children.
(iii) There is a sexual division of labour in most
families where women do all work outside the
home.
(iv) Majority of women do some paid work in
addition to domestic labour both in rural and
urban areas but their work is not valued and does
not get recognition.
(v) Women constitute half of the humanity, their role
in public life, especially politics is minimal in most
societies.
(vi) In our country, women still lag behind men as
ours is still a male dominated patriarchal society.
Women face disadvantage, discrimination and
oppression in various ways.
(Any five)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1×5=5
Q. 2. Literacy and urbanisation combined with
economic growth have changed the value system
of Indian society. Explain with reference to India’s
social problems.

3-5 marks each
Ans. (i) The caste system is very old in India and was
also very rigid at one time but due to literacy and
economic development these caste barriers are
breaking down. People in urban areas who are
literate mostly do not believe in inequality based
on caste. It is accepted that all are equal. Rising
economic status of backward castes has helped to
erode caste lines.
(ii) The problem of communalism has decreased
and there is less violence in the name of religion.
People who are literate mostly do not get swayed
by appeal to religious emotions. Economic progress
and urbanisation has greatly helped to cultivate
the secular mindset.
(iii) The position of women too has improved with the
spread of literacy among women. Now they can
earn and be economically independent. This helps
to increase self-esteem and decreases dependence
on male members of society.
(iv) The system of dowry at the time of marriage
is getting diluted due to literacy and economic
development of women.
(v) The practice of child marriage is decreasing due to
spread of literacy.
(vi) There is occupational mobility due to spread of
urbanisation and literacy and people are free to
follow the profession of their choice rather than
follow hereditary professions.
(Any five)
		
1×5=5

TOPIC-2

Religion, Communalism and Politics
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Which type of state is India ?
Ans. Secular.
1
Q. 2. Communalism refers to a division based on which
idea ?
Ans. Religion.
1
Q. 3. On which idea is communal politics based ?
Ans. Religion.
1
Q. 4. What do we call a person who does not discriminate
against other on the basis of religious beliefs ?
Ans. Secular.
1
Q. 5. Buddhism is the major religion of which country ?
Ans. Sri Lanka.
1
Q. 6. Which feature is against the spirit of Indian
secularism ?
Ans. The religious community in majority is given a
prominent place in the government.
1
Q. 7. Who said that religion can never be separated
from politics ?
Ans. Mahatma Gandhi.
1
Q. 8. Which country has no official religion of its own ?
Ans. India.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. How can communalism pose a great threat to
Indian Democracy ?
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
OR

1 mark each


3 marks each
		How can religion be a source of danger to
democratic politics ? Explain your view points.
				
[School of Scholars, 2015]

126 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. Communalism can pose a great threat to Indian
democracy as :
(i) It leads to the belief that people belonging to
different religions can not live as equal citizens
within one nation. Either one of them has to
dominate the rest or they have to form different
nations.
(ii) Any attempt to bring followers of one religion
together in a context other than religion is bound
to suppress many voices within that community.
		
1½+1½=3
Q. 2. Explain any three forms of communalism in the
Indian politics ?
			
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG), (WQYFXWC)]
Ans. Communalism can take various forms in the
Indian politics :
		
Refer to Q. 1., Long Answer Type Questions, Page
125.
3
Q. 3. Suggest any two measures to check communalism
in India.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. (i) Communal prejudices and propaganda need to
be countered in everyday life.
(ii) Religion based mobilisation needs to be countered
in the arena of politics.
1½+1½=3
Q. 4. “The Government of India gives holidays for the
festivals of most of the religions.” Why is it so ?
Give your view point.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. It is so because :
(i) India is a secular state, there is no official religion in
our country.
(ii) The constitution provides freedom to all to profess,
practice and propagate any religion or not to follow
any.
(iii) The constitution prohibits discrimination on the
ground of religion.
1×3=3
Q. 5. What is Communalism? How is communalism a
hindrance in the functioning of our democracy?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580042)]



Ans. Communalism : When beliefs of one religion are
presented as superior to those of other religions,
when the demands of one religious group are
formed in opposition to another and when
state power is used to establish domination of
one religious group over the rest, we call it as
communalism.
		Communalism is a hindrance in the functioning
of our democracy as :
(i) Communalism leads to the belief that people
belonging to different religions cannot live as equal
citizens within one nation. Either, one of them has
to dominate the rest or they have to form different
nation.
(ii) Any attempt to bring all followers of one religion
together in context other than religion is bound to
suppress many voices within that community.
		
1+2=3
Q. 6. How are religious differences expressed in
politics ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580011)]
Ans. The religious differences are often expressed in
the field of politics, i.e. :
(i) Gandhiji used to say that religion can never be
separated from politics, what he meant by religion
was not any particular religion like Hinduism or
Islam but moral values that infirm all religions.
He believed that politics must be guided by ethics
drawn from religion.
(ii) Human right groups in our country have argued
that most of the victims of communal riots in our
country are people from religious minorities. They
have demanded that the government take special
steps to protect religious minorities.
(iii) Womens’ movement has agreed that family laws of
all religions discriminate against women. So they
have demanded that government should change
these laws to make them more equitable. 1×3=3

5 marks each
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What form does Communalism take in politics ?
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012)]
Or
		Explain any three forms of communal politics,
with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580015, 25, 34, 38)]
Or
		Explain how Communalism is being expressed in
politics ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37)]
Or
		 What does the term Communalism mean ? Explain
any four forms which communalism takes in
politics.
[Board Term 1, 2013 (10S), 2012 (49)]
Ans.		Communalism : It means attempts to promote
religious ideas between groups of people which
are identified as different communities.
		 Communalism can take various forms in politics :
(i) The most common expression of communalism
is in everyday beliefs. These routinely involve
religious prejudices, stereotype of religious
communities and belief in the superiority of one’s
religion over other religions. This is so common
that we often fail to notice it, even when we
believe in it.
(ii) A communal mind often leads to a quest for
political dominance of one’s own religious
community. For those belonging to majority
community, this takes the form of majoritarian
dominance. For those belonging to the minority
community, it can take the form of a desire to
form a separate political unit.

[ 127

GENDER, RELIGION AND CASTE

(iii)

Political mobilisation on religious lines is another
frequent form of communalism. This involves
the use of sacred symbols, religious leaders,
emotional appeal and plain fear in order to bring
the followers of one religion together in the
political arena.
(iv) Sometimes communalism takes its most ugly
form of communal violence, riots and massacre.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 1+4=5

Q. 2. How can the relationship between politics and
religion be beneficial and problematic at the same
time ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (61)]
OR
		It is inevitable to ignore the relationship between
politics and religion.
		It what away does this relationship impacts
modern day politics ? Explain.
				

[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JNEVD]

Ans.		Beneficial :
(i) Influence of religion can make politics value
based.
(ii) Religious communities can politically express
their needs and interests.
(iii) Political authorities can monitor and control
religious discrimination and opression.
Problematic :
(i) Religion can become the base for the development
of nationalist sentiments which can lead to
conflicts.
(ii) Political parties will try to make political gains by
pitting one group against the other.
(iii) State power may be used to establish the
domination of one religious group over another.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 2½+2½=5

Q. 3. Describe any five constitutional provisions that
make India a secular.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Or
		What is the meaning of “Secularism”? How
does the constitution make India a secular state?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (39)]
Or
		“The makers of the Indian Constitution chose
the model of a secular state for India.” Which
constitutional provisions make India a secular
state in the light of the above statement.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]
Or
		 What is a secular state? How does the Constitution
of India ensure that India remains a secular state?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (65)]
Or
		How does the constitution of India ensure
secularism ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580013, 33, 37, 43)]
Ans.		Secularism means no special status is given to any
religion. It is just not an ideology of some parties
or persons.
(i) There is no official religion for the Indian states,
unlike the status of Buddhism in Sri Lanka,or that
of Islam is Pakistan.
(ii) The constitution provides freedom to all to
protest, practice and propagate any religion, or
not to follow any.
(iii) The constitution prohibits discrimination on
grounds of religion.
(iv) The constitution allows state to intervene in the
matters of religion in order to ensure equality
within religious communities. For example, it
bans untouchability.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1+4=5

TOPIC-3

Caste and Politics
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. According to the census of India, 2001, what is the
population percentage of scheduled castes ?
Ans. 16.2%.
1
Q. 2. Which division is unique to India ?
Ans. Caste division.
1
Q. 3. What does caste hierarchy mean ?
Ans. A ladder like formation in which all caste groups
are placed from the highest to the lowest.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Describe three advantages of the political
expression of caste differences.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-XOKG2SB]
Ans. Advantages of the political expression of caste
differences are :

1 mark each


3 marks each
(i) It gives disadvantaged groups the opportunity to
demand a share in power and decision- making.
(ii) Many political parties take up the issue of ending
caste discrimination.
(iii) Measures for uplifting the status of the backward
castes will be undertaken.
1×3=3

128 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 2. Describe the adverse effects of caste in politics in
India.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580023, 29, 35, 45)]
Ans. Adverse effects of caste in politics in India :
(i) Political parties try to use caste to gain votes.
(ii) Promise to take care of interests and demands of
different castes.
(iii) Lead to conflicts and tensions among various caste
groups.
1×3=3
Q. 3. How does caste get politicised ? Give three
points.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (A2), 2010 (A2)]
Ans. (i) Each caste group tries to become bigger by
incorporating within its neighbouring castes or
sub-castes which were earlier excluded from it.
(ii) Various caste groups are required to enter into a
coalition with other castes or communities and
thus enter into a dialogue and negotiation.
(iii) New kinds of caste groups have come up in the
political area like ‘backward’ and ‘forward’ caste
groups.
1×3=3
Q. 4. Why are caste barriers breaking down in India ?
Explain with three reasons.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580024, 32, 36)]
Ans. Caste barriers are breaking down in India due to
the following reasons :
(i) With the economic development, large scale
urbanisation, growth of literacy and education,
occupational mobility and the weakening of the
position of landlords in the villages, the old notions
of caste hierarchy are breaking down.
(ii) Due to socio-economic changes, i.e., now, most of
the times, in urban areas it does not matter much
who is walking along next to us on street or eating
at the next table in a restaurant.

(iii)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

The Constitution of India prohibited any castebased discrimination and laid the foundations
of policies to reserve the injustices of the caste
system.
1×3=3
Q. 5.
Explain the impact of caste system on Indian
democracy.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580024)]
Ans.
Impact of caste system on Indian democracy :
Expression of caste differences in politics gives
many disadvantaged communities the space to
demand this share of power. In this sense caste
politics has helped people from Dalits and OBC
caste to gain better access to decision-making.
Several political and non-political organizations
have been demanding and agitating for an end to
discrimination against particular castes, for more
dignity and more access to land, resources and
opportunities.
Exclusive attention can produce negative
results as well. It can divert attention from other
pressing issues such as poverty, development and
corruption. In some cases it leads to violence.
		
1×3=3
Q. 6.
“Caste has not still disappeared from contemporary
India.” Write any three examples to justify the
statement.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580041)]
Ans.
Caste has not disappeared from contemporary
India. Some of the older aspects of caste which are
persisting are as follows :
Even now most people marry within their own
caste or tribe.
Untouchability has not ended completely, despite
constitutional prohibition.
Effects of centuries of advantages and
disadvantages continued to be felt today. 1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. The focus on caste in politics can sometimes give
an impression that elections are all about caste
and nothing else. Do you agree ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. No, I do not agree.
		
The focus on caste in politics can sometimes give
an impression that elections are all about caste and
nothing else. This is far from true because.
(i) No parliamentary constituency in the country
has a clear majority of one single caste. So, every
candidate and party needs to win the confidence
of more than one caste and community to win
elections.
(ii) No party wins the votes of all the voters of a caste
or community. When people say that a caste is a
‘vote bank’ of one party, it usually means that a
large proportion of the voters form the caste vote
for the party.
(iii) Many political parties may put up candidates from
the same caste (if that caste is believed to dominate
the electorate in a particular constituency). Some
voters have more than one candidate from their
caste while many voters have no candidates from
their caste.

5 marks each
(iv)

The ruling party of the sitting M.P. or M.L.A.
frequently lose elections in our country. That could
not have happened if all castes or communities
were frozen in their political preferences.
1+4=5

Q. 2. How can caste take different forms in politics ?
Explain with examples. [Board Term 1, 2012 (67)]
OR
		Analyse the role of caste in Indian politics.
				

[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]

Ans. Influence of caste on politics :
(i) While choosing candidates for election, political
parties consider the caste composition of the
voters to win support.
(ii) When the government are formed, political
parties take care that representative from
different castes find place in the government.
(iii) Political parties make appeal to the caste
sentiments to win votes.
(iv) Some political parties are known to favour some
caste.

GENDER, RELIGION AND CASTE

(v)

Universal adult franchise and the principle of
one-person one-vote have compelled the political
leaders to bring caste sentiments into politics to
muster support.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5

Q. 3. Explain the factors that have led to the weakening
of the caste system in India.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		Explain any five reasons for the declining caste
system in India.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]
Or
		What factors have brought about a change in the
Indian caste system in modern times ? Explain.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Or
		
Explain any five socio-economic changes
responsible for breaking down the old notion of
caste hierarchy in India. [Board Term 1, 2012 (60)]
Ans.		Decline of the Caste System in India :
(i) Efforts of social reformers like Phule, Gandhiji,
Ambedkar against caste system have helped to
promote a casteless society.
(ii) Economic development has reduced the
emphasis on caste.
(iii) Large scale urbanisation has diminished the
awareness of caste, as people rub shoulders in
buses, trains and offices.
(iv) Growth of literacy and education has helped to
decrease the belief in caste.
(v) Occupational mobility is possible now and
children are not compelled to continue the
profession of the family or father.
(vi) Weakening of the position of landlords in the
villages has led to decline of the rigid caste
barriers in villages.
(vii) Constitutional provisions such as Right to
Equality of all before law have helped to prevent
discrimination legally.
(viii) Policy of reservation of seats in local selfgovernment bodies and legislatures as well in
educational institutes have helped to uplift the
political, social and economic position of lower
castes.
(Any five)
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 4. “Caste has not still disappeared from
contemporary India.” Support the statement with
suitable examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Or
		 “Caste has not still disappeared from contemporary
India”. Do you agree with the statement ? Justify
your answer with suitable argument.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36)]

[ 129
Ans.		Yes, I agree with the statement.
		Arguments :
(i) Most people marry within their own caste or
tribe.
(ii) Untouchability has not ended despite provisions
in the constitution.
(iii) Effects of centuries of advantages and
disadvantages continue to be felt today.
(iv) A large mass of low caste people still do not have
access to education.
(v) Caste is continued to be linked to economic
status. (Or any other relevant argument)
Note : Marks will also be awarded, if somebody
disagrees and gives suitable arguments.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 5. Describe the positive and negative aspects of
relationship between caste and politics.
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		Describe three advantages and two disadvantages
of the political expression of caste differences.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (48)]
Or
		 Analyse any five advantages and disadvantages of
the political expression of caste differences ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (62)]
Ans.		Advantages :
(i) It gives disadvantaged groups the opportunity to
demand a share in power and decision- making.
(ii) Many political parties take up the issue of ending
caste discrimination.
(iii) Measures for uplifting the status of the backward
castes will be undertaken.
Disadvantages :
(i) Caste-based politics diverts attention from main
issues such as poverty, corruption etc.
(ii) Castebased politics leads to tensions, conflicts
and violence.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3+2=5
Q. 6. Assess the influences of politics on caste system.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (69)]
Ans. Influence of politics on Caste :
(i) Each caste group tries to become bigger by
incorporating within it sub-castes.
(ii) Various caste groups are required to enter into a
coalition with other caste or communities.
(iii) New kinds of caste groups have entered politics
like ‘backward’ and ‘forward’ castes.
(iv) Politics in caste has allowed many disadvantaged
caste groups to demand their share of power.
(v) Caste politics has helped the dailts and OBCs to
gain better access to decision-making.
		
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1×5=5



UNIT – IV

Understanding
Economic
Development
SYLLABUS

1

CHAPTER

DEVELOPMENT

¾¾ The traditional notion of development, national income and per capita income.
¾¾ Growth of NI — Critical appraisal of existing development indicators (PCI, IMR, SR and other
income and health indicators).
¾¾ The need for health and educational development, human development indicators are a holistic
measure of development in simple and brief as a holistic measure of development.
¾¾ The approach to this theme : Use case study of three states (Kerala, Punjab and Bihar) or take a few
countries. (India, China, Sri Lanka and one developed country).

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

QUICK REVIEW
zz

Development is also known as progress. Its idea has always
been with us.

zz

Each person has its own aspirations and desires about what
he would like to do and how he would like to spend his life.

zz

People want regular work, better wages, decent price for
their crops or other products. In other words, they want
more income.

TOPIC - 1
National Development .... P. 132
TOPIC - 2
Public Facilities .... P. 135
TOPIC - 3
Sustainability of Development .... P. 139

zz

Besides seeking more income, people also want equal
treatment, freedom, security, respect of other, they resent
discrimination.

zz

Different kinds of people can have different developmental goals. For example, an urban unemployed
youth would aspire for a good salaried job, promotions etc. and on the other hand, a rural unemployed
would want better job opportunities in the village, job security and dignity of labour.

zz

Income is the most important component of development.

zz

To make a comparison among various countries, their national income and per capita income is considered
as a base point.

zz

Individuals seek different goals and thus their notion of national development is also likely to be different.

zz

The World Bank considers only the per capita income as the indicator of the development.

zz

The UNDP considers health, educational levels and the per capita income of the citizens as the indicator
of development.

zz

According to the World Bank criterion, countries with the per capita income of US $ 12616 per annum and
above in 2012 are called rich countries and those with the per capita income of US $ 1035 or less are called
low-income countries.

zz

India comes in the category of low-income countries because its per capita income in 2004 was just US $
1530 per annum.

zz

The other criteria of comparing two states or countries are their Infant Mortality Rate (IMR), Literacy Rate,
Net Attendance Ratio, Human Development Index, available facilities, etc.

zz

Income by itself is not an adequate indicator of material goods and services that the people able to use. For
example, income cannot buy a pollution-free environment.

zz

Kerala has a low Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) and high literacy rate because it has adequate provision of
health care and educational facilities.

[ 131

DEVELOPMENT

zzSome states such as Tamil Nadu has a well functioning (PDS) for supply of food grains to poor people in rural areas,

whereas Jharkhand does not has an efficient system.
zzNutrition

is another aspect of development which is also an important factor. An internationally used standard is
Body Mass Index (BMI) which determines whether an adult person is undernourished or not.

zzWe

should use the natural resources efficiently so that development can be sustained over a long period of time.

KNOW THE TERMS
zzDevelopment

: Development means more income and for higher income they need regular work, better wages
and reasonable and fair prices for their products.

zzNational

Development : National development means increase in per capita income and also self-sufficiency of
an economy.

zzSustainable

Economic Development : Sustainable development is that process of economic development which
aims maintaining the quality of life of both present and future generation without harming natural resources and
environment.

zzEconomic

Activities : Activities that give an income in return or in simple words activity which deals with money.

zzNon-economic

Activities : Activities which do not deal with money or which do not give any income in return.

zzEconomic

Development : A process whereby the national income and the per capita income of a country rises
and along with this, the number of people living in poverty falls, more employment opportunities are created and
standard of living among the poor section of society improves is known as “Economic Development”.

zzNational

Income : It is the sum total of all final goods and services produced in a country during a given period of
time plus net factor income from abroad.

zzPer

Capita Income : Average income of a person of a country.

zzPer

Capita Income =

zzDeveloping

Total income of country
Total population

Countries : Countries in which income rises along with the standard of living are called “Developing

Countries”.
zzUnderdeveloped

Country : A country which does not have high income and the standard of living is also low is
considered as “Underdeveloped Country”.

zzEconomy
zzInfant

: The economic framework which helps us to describe the economic life of the country and its people.

Mortality Rate : The number of children that die before the age of one year per 1000 live births in one year.

zzLiteracy

Rate : Proportion of literate population in the 7 and above age group.

zzNet Attendance Ratio : Total number of children of age group 6-10 attending school as a percentage of total number

of children in the same age group.
zzB.M.I.

=

Weight in Kg.
(Height in meters)2

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Body Mass Index Calculator
		http://www.halls.md/body-mass-index/bmi.html
2. Statistics of Human Development Report 2011
		http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/HDR-2011-EN-Tables.pdf
3. Literacy Rate of Indian States
		http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian-states-ranking-by-literacy-rate

132 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

FLOWCHART
Development

Economic Development

Human Development

National Income

Infant Mortality Rate

Per Capita Income

Literacy Rate
Net Attendance Ratio
Public Facilities

TOPIC-1

National Development
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Mention any one development as goal of land less
rural labourers. [Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
OR
		What is the development goal of rural people of
India as per your viewpoint ? [DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans.		Any one development goals of landless rural
labourers can be :
(i) Regular income.
(ii) Regular job.
(iii) Small piece of land.
(vi) Equal status in society.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1
Q. 2. In what respect is the criterion used by the UNDP
for measuring development of the countries,
different from the one used by the World Bank?
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. UNDP compares countries on educational level,
health status and per capita income whereas.
World Bank uses only per capita per capita income
for measuring development.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1
Q. 3. If there are 4 families in a country with per capita
income of $ 15000. The income of 3 families is $
10000, $ 20000, and $ 12000. What is the income of
the 4th family ? [Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. $ 18000.
1
Q. 4. What is the advantage of per capita income ?
Mention any one. [Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. It is the most appropriate criterion of measuring
the development of any country.
1

1 mark each

Q. 5. How is the average income of a country
calculated ?
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. Dividing the total income of the country by its total
population.
1
Q. 6. According to the World Bank (2004), which country
would be classified as a low income country ?		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Any country with percapita income of US $ 1035 or
less .
1
Q. 7. What is the most common indicator for measuring
economic development of a country ?
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		Which is a useful measure for comparison
between countries ?
Or
		Which factor determines the development of a
country ?
Or
Which income is also called average income ?
Ans. Per Capita Income.
1
Q. 8. Into how many categories the World Bank has
classified the countries ?
Ans. Three.
1
Q. 9. Which area of the world has the largest crude oil
reserves ?
Ans. Middle East.
1
Q. 10. Which countries are called rich countries ?
Ans. Countries with per capita income of US $ 12616 and
above.
1

DEVELOPMENT

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What is the meaning of development? Explain the
two aspects of development?
		(Board Term 1, 2015-16, C5JWEVD, School of
Scholars, Yavatmal).
Ans. Development refers to progress or improvement in
life style. Important aspects of development are :
(i) Different
persons
can
have
different
developmental goals.
(ii) What may be development for one may not
be development for the other. It may even be
destructive for others.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 3
Q. 2. Which three development goals will you like to
prescribe for rural labourers?
			
[Board term, 1 DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. Three development goals for rural labourers :
(i) More days of work and better wages.
(ii) Local schools to provide quality education for
their children.
(iii) There will be no social discrimination. 1 × 3 = 3
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015]
Q. 3. Explain the sectors on which the quality of life
depends.
[Board term 1, 2015, Set-XOKG2SB]
Ans. The quality of life depends upon the following
sectors :
(i) money and material things.
(ii) presence of family members, friends and relatives.
(iii) good working atmosphere at the office.
(iv) an opportunity to learn.
(v) a position of self respect in the family.
(vi) a safe and secure environment.
(Any 3 points)
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 4. What is meant by economic development ?
What are the two bases of measuring economic
development of a country ?
				[DDE 2015-16 Board Term 1, 2011, (580015, 39)]
Ans. Economic development means the rate of
production is greater than the rate of increase in
population and the rate of growth of GDP is high
enough to fulfil the basic needs of the population.
Two bases of measuring development of a country
are :
(i) Average or per capita income.
(ii) National income and public facilities.
1+2=3
Q. 5. State the criterion used by the World Bank as per
World Development Report 2012, in classifying
the countries. How did the World Bank define
low and high income countries (based on this
report) ?
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. (i) The World Bank defined low and high income
countries according to per capita income (PCI).
(ii) Countries with per capita income of US $ 12616 per
annum and above are called rich countries.
(iii) Countries with per capita income of US $ 1035 or
less are called low-income or poor countries.
		
1×3=3

[ 133
3 marks each
Q. 6. Why do different individuals have different
as well as conflicting notions of development
goals ?
(NCERT)
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC) 2012, (55)]
Or
		Explain common, different, and conflicting goals
by giving appropriate examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (64)]
Or
		
“Different
persons
can
have
different
developmental goals.” Support the statement
with an example.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580023, 26, 36, 45)]
Ans. Development goals may be common, different or
conflicting :
(i) Common Goals : There are some needs which
are common to all like income, freedom, equality,
security, respect, friendship etc.
(ii) Different Goals : Development or progress does
not mean the same thing for every individual.
Each individual has his own idea of development.
For example, development for a farmer might be
irrigation facilities; for an unemployed youth it
may mean employment opportunities, etc.
(iii) Conflicting Goals : What may be development
for some may become destruction for some
others. Example : Industrialists may want dams
for electricity but such dams would displace the
natives of a region by submerging their land.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 7. Explain the role of education and health in the
overall development of a country.
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (3K)]
Ans. (i) Role of education : It plays a vital role in
the overall development of a human being and
society, therefore stress on imparting education
has been given up in our constitution.
(ii) Role of Health : The general health standard
in India is quite low. This is quite inevitable as
nearly one fourth of the population lives below
the poverty line.
(iii) A community - based programme on health care
and medical services in rural areas are launched.
As a result of these efforts, there has been a fall in
the incidence of certain diseases like tuberculosis,
leprosy and polio.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2013) 1×3=3
Q. 8. Describe any three features of a developed
country.
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
Ans. (i) High per capita income.
(ii) High HDI.
(iii) Greater focus on economic growth rather than
development.
(iv) High standard of living.
(v) Most of the population has access to basic
healthcare and education.

134 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(vi) High quality of life parameter — including
freedom, equal opportunities etc.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2013) ½×6=3
Q. 9. “For development, people look at a mix of
goals”. Support the statement with three suitable
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580011, 13)]
Ans. It is true that for development, people look at a
mix of goals, e.g. :
(i) If women are engaged in paid work, their dignity
in the household and society increases. So dignity
is an important goal.
(ii) However, it is also the case that if there is respect
for women there would be more sharing of
housework and greater acceptance of women
working outside.

(iii)

(i)
(ii)
A safe and secure environment may allow more
women to take up a variety of jobs or run a
business. These are goals other than income. Hence
development goal is not only for better income but
for other important things in life.
1×3=3
Q. 10.
Mention
any
three
characteristics
of
development.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012, 35)]
Ans.
Characteristics of Development :
What may be development for one may not be
development for the others.
For development, people look at mix goals.
Income is the most important component of
development, but along with income, people also
seek equal treatment, good health, peace and
security, etc.
1×3=3

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What is development? Why do different people
have different developmental goals? Explain with
four examples. [Board Term 1, 2015-16, 6AP67LB]
Ans. Development means continuous progress or
increase in real per-capita income. In other words,
there is improvement in economic welfare of
the people and their standard of living. The four
characteristics of development are :
(i)

Developmental goals are different for different
people.

(ii)

What may be development for one may not be
development for the other.

(iii)

For development people look at a mix of goals.

(iv)

Different persons could have different as well as
conflicting notions of country’s development.

		 [CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1 + 4 = 5
Q. 2. Explain with reasons why state of Punjab with a
very high per capita income has a very low literacy
rate.
[Board Term 1, 2015, set-C5JWEVD]
[Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]
Ans. (i) Per capita income of Punjab is ` 26 ,000 and
Kerala is ` 22,800.
(ii)

Literacy rate of Punjab according to 2001 census
is 70% and Kerala is 91%, i.e., Punjab lags behind
Kerala.

(iii)

Therefore, income by itself is not a completely
adequate indicator of material goods and services
that citizens are able to use.

(iv)

Over the past decade, health and education
indicators have come to be widely used along
with income as a measure of development.

(v) Kerala has a low infant mortality rate as it
has adequate provision of basic health and
educational facilities.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1×5=5



5 marks each
Q. 3. Is per capita income a true measure of
development ? Elaborate.
				
[Board Term 1, 2013 (3K)]
Or
		
What is Per Capita Income ? How is it
calculated ? Why is “Per Capita Income” not an
adequate indicator of economic development of a
country ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (67)]
Ans. Per capita income is the average income. It is
income per head of the population per year.
Total income of country
		
Per Capita Income =
Total population
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Q. 4.

It is not an adequate indicator because :
It does not tell us how this income is distributed.
Per capita Income might not be the income of
every individual in the state.
Life expectancy and Infant Mortality Rate
are other important criteria for measuring
development.
Education and literacy level are other indicators
of development.
Pollution free environment, less corruption,
gender equality etc. are also important.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1+1+3=5
How has the World Development Report classified
countries ? What are the limitations of this
report ?
[Board Term 1, 2013, (501), 2012 (62)]

Ans. (i) World Bank classifies countries according to
the Per Capita Income.
(ii) Countries with PCI of more than US $ 12616 per
annum and above are called rich countries.
(iii) Countries with PCI less than US $ 1035 are called
poor countries.
(iv) Countries with income between US $ 1530 per
annum are called low middle income countries.
The limitations of this report are :
(i) It considers only income and not other aspects
such as literacy, health, life expectancy, etc.
(ii) World Development Report (WDR) only tells about
income and not how it is distributed among the
citizens.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2013) 3+2=5

[ 135

DEVELOPMENT

Q. 5. Study the data given in the table carefully and answer the questions that follow :

[Board Term 1, 2012 (74)]

State

Infant Mortality
Rate per 1000

Literacy Rate
2000-2003

Net attendance
Ratio

Per capita income
(in `)

Punjab

49

70

81

26,000

Kerala

11

91

91

22,800

Bihar

60

47

41

5,700

(a) Which state has highest literacy rate ?
(b) Which state has the highest per capita income and why ?
(c) Which state has highest infant mortality and why ?
Ans. (a) Kerala : 91%
(b) Punjab : ` 26,000.
Reason : Developed infrastructural facilities.
(c) Bihar.
Reason : The state lacks health facilities.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1+2+2 = 5
Q. 6. Why do we use averages to compare the
development of countries ? What are the
limitations in using it ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (70)]
Ans. Use of averages to compare development :
(i)

Averages are used for better understanding.

(ii)

For comparison between countries, total income
is not very useful.

(iii)

Different countries have different populations,
so total income will not tell us what an average
person is likely to earn.

(iv)

According to the World Bank, countries with
per capita income of US $ 12616 per annum and
above in 2012 are called rich countries, and those
below US $ 1035 per annum or less are poor.

Limitation : Average income does not depict
how the income is distributed among the people.
Some may be very rich but the masses may be
poor.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 4+1=5
Q. 7. What is development ? What are the indicators
used by UNDP for measuring development ?
Compare it with the World Bank report.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Ans. (i) Development refers to the process as a result
of which along with increase in real per-capita
income, there is improvement in the economic
welfare and well-being of people.
(ii) The UNDP has taken :
(a) education,
(b) health and
(c) per capita income as the indicators.
(iii) Compared to the World Bank Report :
(a) It is a broader concept of development.
(b) Countries have been ranked and goals other
than level of income are being taken into
account.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 3+2=5

HOTS Questions

3-5 marks each

Q. 1. Study the table and answer the questions below :
State

Per Capita income for 2002-03 (in `)

Punjab

26,000

Kerala

22,800

Bihar

5,700

		 (i) Which state has the highest per capita income
in a year ?
		(ii) Which state has the lowest per capita income
in a year ?

		(iii) Which state is better one and why ?
		
		

[Board Term 1, 2011 (580016, 20, 27)]

Ans. (i) Punjab has the highest per capita income in a
year i.e., ` 26,000
		
(ii) Bihar has the lowest per capita income in one
year i.e., ` 5,700
		
(iii) Punjab is better one because its per capita
income is more than Bihar. The purchasing
power of Punjab is more than Bihar. 1×3=3

TOPIC-2

Public Facilities
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What is the full form of HDI?
[Board Term 1, 2015-16, 6AP67LB]

1 mark each

Ans. Human Development Index.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1

136 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Q. 2. Why do some people oppose dams ? Give one
reason.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. Because this disrupt the lives of people who are
displaced.
1
Q. 3. What other goal is included in the developmental
goals besides having better income ?
				
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. Equal treatment, freedom, education, security and
peace.
1
Q. 4. What is denoted by the life expectancy at birth ?
Ans. Average expected length of life.
1
Q. 5. Why Kerala has low infant mortality rate ?
Ans. It has adequate provision of basic health and
educational facilities.
1
Q. 6. How can we achieve the development goals of
different sections of our society ?
Ans. By democratic political process.
1
Q. 7. Which state of India has a high infant mortality
rate according to data 2003 ?
Ans. Bihar.
1

Q. 8. What is India’s HDI rank in the world?
Ans. 134.
1
Q. 9. Which is a development goal for the landless rural
labourers ?
Ans. More days of work and better wages.
1
Q. 10. What do you mean by ‘Literacy Rate’ ?
Ans. It measures the proportion of literate population in
the 7 years and above age group.
1
Q. 11. In which state, literacy rate is the highest ?
Ans. Kerala.
1
Q. 12. How we will calculate Body Mass Index ?
Ans. Dividing the weight by the square of the height in
meters.
1
Q. 13. Which country has the largest size of illiterate
population in the age group of 15 + in the world ?
Ans. Bangladesh.
1
Q. 14. Write the components of Human Development
Index ?
Ans. Life expectancy, gross enrolment ratio and per
capita income.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. State any three factors other than income that are
important in life.
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. (i) Infant Mortality Rate : It is an indicator of the
availability of doctors and medical facilities in the
region as well the awareness of the people living
there in regard to diseases and their prevention.
(ii) Literacy Rate : This is an indicator of the number of
schools and teachers available in a region and also
indicates whether the facilities are being used or
not due to societal pressures.
(iii) Life Expectancy : This is also an indicator of
available health facilities. Low life expectancy is a
hindrance to economic development.
1×3=3
Q. 2. Which three efforts should be made by any
country to improve its HDI? [DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. The three efforts which could be made by any
country to improve its HDI are :
(i) providing 100% literacy to the people.
(ii) improving health facilities.
(iii) creating a pollution free environment.
		 [CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 3. Apart from income, which other six things people
look for growth and development ?
(NCERT)
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
OR
		Give same example where factors other than
income are important aspects of own lives.
Ans. (i) Apart from income, people also seek things like
equal treatment, freedom, security and respect of
others.
(ii) They resent discrimination. All these are important
goals.

3 marks each
(iii)

In fact, in some cases, these may be more important
than more income or more consumption because
material goods are not all that you need to live.
(iv) Money or material things that one can buy with it
is one factor on which our life depends.
		
(Any three) 1×3=3
Q. 4. Explain the three components of Human
Development Index.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Or
		Write the importance of human development
index in three points.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (77)]
Or
		Write a note on Human Development Index.
[Board Term 1, 2011 2013 (501), (580022, 24, 29,
		
33, 37)]
Ans. Human Development Index is published by the
UNDP.
(i) It indicates the level of development of a country.
(ii) It indicates to a country how far it has travelled
and how far it has yet to travel to achieve high
ranks in matters such as per capita income of the
people.
(iii) One comes to know the important welfare
elements such as life expectancy, literacy,
educational level of people and health status.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1×3=3
Q. 5. Explain the terms : Net attendance Ratio and
Literacy Rate.
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. (i) Net Attendance Ratio : Total number of children
of age group 6-10 attending school as a percentage
of total number of children in the same age group.
(ii) Literacy Rate : Proportion of literate population in
the age group of 7 years and above.
1½+1½=3

[ 137

DEVELOPMENT

Q. 6. Explain the concept of ‘Human Development’
with an example.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012)]
Ans. (i) Human development means that education and
health are an important part to achieve well-being
of the human resource.
(ii) Human development indicates that the human
mind becomes efficient to perform task of highly-

skilled nature when proper education is provided
to them and a healthy life style is available.
(iii)

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Describe any five conditions or aspects that you
would consider before accepting a job.
				
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE), 2012 (36)]
Or
		If you get a job in a far off place before accepting
it, you would try to consider many factors. Explain
any five such factors.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		Give examples to prove that there are other
important developmental goals than income.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (80)]
Ans. If one gets a job in a far off place, before accepting
it one would try to consider many factors, apart
from income such as :
(i) Facilities for the family : I would have to check
if there is good educational facility for children, a
good house and locality to stay in, good medical
facilities should also be available.
(ii) Job security : I should have clear terms of
employment in my appointment letter. A job
which gives high pay but no job security will
reduce one’s sense of security and freedom.
(iii) Opportunity to learn : There should be
opportunity for personal career growth, so that
no boredom or stagnation sets in.
(iv) Working atmosphere needs to be cooperative
and healthy : There should be good team spirit
and the seniors should look after the newcomers
and guide them. If women are engaged in paid
work, their dignity in the household and society
increases. A safe and secured environment may
allow more women to take up jobs or run a
business.
(v) Time for your family : Working hours should
be fixed and adhered to so that there is time for
spending with family. Leave facility must be
there as well.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1×5=5
Q. 2. Explain with examples that there are other
important development goals also besides
income.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		“Developmental goals are different for different
people”. Explain the statement with appropriate
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (65, 69)]
Ans. (i) Development or progress does not mean
one and same thing for every individual.
Each individual has his/her own notion of
development.

For example : Every human being has a basic right
to get a good education and better health facilities.
Those countries which provide the basic necessities
of life progress faster than those countries which
do not have these facilities.
1×3=3

5 marks each
(ii)

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Q. 3.

People seek things that are most important for
them, i.e. things that can fulfil their aspiration or
desires.
Examples :
Development for a farmer might be proper
irrigation facilities.
For an urban youth, it may be employment.
For a landless labourer, it may be land.
For a girl, it might mean gender equality or more
freedom.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 2+3=5
Besides income, what can be the other attributes
to compare economic development ?		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]

Ans. Income is not only the criterion but it is one of the
important indicators of economic development.
Some of the others attributes are :
(a) Infant Mortality Rate : It is an indicator of the
availability of doctors and medical facilities in the
region as well the awareness of the people living
there in regard to diseases and their prevention.
Low infant mortality rate indicates good medical
facilities and all round development in the
society. A high rate will be an economic loss for
the region as much effort is wasted, which could
have been harnessed.
(b) Literacy Rate : This is an indicator of the number
of schools and teachers available in a region and
also indicates whether the facilities are being
used or not due to societal pressures. Low literacy
rate shows backwardness and there will not be
fast economic development.
(c) Life Expectancy : This is also an indicator of
available health facilities. Low life expectancy will
be a hindrance to economic development.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 5
Q. 4. How far is it correct to say that money in your
pocket cannot buy the basic needs to live well ?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (58)]
Ans. (i) Income by itself is not a completely adequate
indicator.
(ii) Money cannot buy you a pollution free
environment.
(iii) Money may also not be able to protect you from
infectious diseases.
		
Therefore, the whole community needs to take
preventive steps, i.e. :
(i) Collective security for the whole society.

138 ]
(ii)
(iii)

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Public facilities such as schools.
Public Distribution System in some states.

(iv) All can only be done collectively and not
individually.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 3+2=5

Value Based Questions

3-5 marks each

Q. 1. Why Kerala has a better human development
ranking than Punjab in spite of lower per capita
income ?
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012)]
Ans. Kerala has a better human development ranking
than Punjab inspite of lower per capita income
because it has adequate provision of basic health
and educational facility. This results in :
(i) Lower mortality rate.
(ii) Higher literacy rate.
(iii) Gross Enrolment ratio is higher.
1×3=3
Q. 2. Explain the main achievements of the Government
of India in the improvement of health status of the
people after 1947.
Ans. Efforts made by the Government in the field of
health can be summarised as follows :


The life expectancy of birth in India has more than
doubled in the last fifty years. It has reached nearly
62 years.

(ii)

In the plan-period, the mortality rate has declined
to nearly 9 per thousand and infant mortality has
come down to 70 per thousand live births. Similarly,
maternal mortality rate has also declined.

(iii)

Efforts have been made to overcome the nutritional
problems in the country and considerable progress
has been achieved.

(iv)

Smallpox has been completely eradicated and
malaria, tuberculosis, leprosy, filaria, etc. have also
been controlled to a large extent.
5

3-5 marks each
HOTS Questions

Q. 1. Study the table given below and answer the
following questions
Infant Mortality
Rate per 1000
(2003)

Literacy Rate
(%) (2001)

Punjab

49

70

Kerala

11

91

Bihar

60

47

State

(i)

		 (i) Calculate the difference in the infant mortality
rate of Punjab and Kerala.
		(ii) Calculate the difference in literacy rate of
Kerala and Bihar.
		(iii) Which state has the lowest HDI and why?		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580015)]
Ans. (i) Difference in the infant mortality rate of Punjab
and Kerala :
		
Mortality rate in Punjab : 49
		
Mortality rate in Kerala : 11
		
Difference =Mortality rate in Punjab – Mortality
rate in Kerala
		
		
49 – 11 = 38
		
		
Difference = 38
(ii) Difference in literacy rate of Kerala and Bihar :
		
		Literacy rate of Kerala = 91
		
		Literacy rate of Bihar = 47
		
		
Difference = Literacy rate of Kerala
				 – Literacy rate of Bihar
		
		
91 – 47 = 44
		
		
Difference = 44
(iii) Bihar has the lowest HDI because :
(a) Infant Mortality rate of Bihar is highest i.e., 60
(b) Literacy rate is low in Bihar i.e., 47
1×3=3

Q. 2.		
Think of other examples where collective
provision of goods and services is cheaper than
individual provision.
[NCERT]
Ans.		Provision of electricity, education and health
facilities etc are cheaper as it caters to the collective
need of the society.
Q. 3.		Does availability of good health and educational
facilities depend only on amount of money spent
by the government on these facilities ? What other
factors could be relevant ?
[NCERT]
Ans.		No, just framing policies and spending money
in the health and education facilities does not
guarantee the success of the programme, there are
other factors that impacts its success.
(i) Effective implementation and monitoring of the
policy mechanism by government officials.
(ii) Remove corruption from the society.
(iii) Curbing socioeconomic inequalities.
(iv) Creating a level of awareness about government
policies and programmes through local bodies and
village communities.
1+4=5
Q. 4.		In Tamil Nadu, 75% of the people living in rural
areas use a ration shop, whereas in Jharkhand
only 8% of rural people do so. Where would
people be better off and why ?
Ans.		Health and nutritional status of people depends on
availability of cheap and reasonable quality on food
grains, sugar and other item from the PDS system.
So in Kerala, the people will be better off, since
more people there unities the facilities provided by
the PDS system.
3

[ 139

DEVELOPMENT

TOPIC-3

Sustainability of Development
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. “There is enough for everybody’s need but not for
everybody’s greed. “ Who said these words ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. Mahatma Gandhi.
1
Q. 2. . State any one reason for overuse of resources? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2015-16 Set-XOKG2SB]
OR
Why ground water is overused?
(NCERT)
1 mark each

Ans. Any one reason for the overuse of resources can
be :
l over population.
l lack of awareness.
l excessive use of tubewells, canals etc for
irrigation.
l industrial need.
(Any other relevant point)

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What is sustainable development? Why is the
issue of sustainability important for development?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2015-16, 6AP67LB, NCERT)]
Ans. Sustainable economic development means
development should take place without damaging
the environment and development in the present
should not compromise with the needs of the
future generation.
Issue of sustainability is important and desirable
for development :
(i) Economic development is a continuous process.
Resources are to be used in such a way that they
are not exploited. At the same time development
should not harm the environment.
(ii) It is desirable because everyone would certainly
like the present level of development to go
further or at least be maintained for the future
generations.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 3
Q. 2. Suggest any three measures for sustainable
development.
[DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. (i) Controlling overuses and creating an
awareness to provide sustainable development.
(ii) Increased use of renewable resources.
(iii) Less use of fossil fuels.
(iv) Introduction of organic farming.
(v) Adopting measures to reduce global warming.
(Any three)
		
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 3


3 marks each
Q. 3. How does sustainability of resources determine
development? Explain with one example.
[DDE-2015, School of Scholars, Yavatmal].
Ans. Refer to Ans 2. of LA of Topic 3.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015]
Q. 4. “The issue of sustainability is important for
development”. Explain. [Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Or
		Why is the issue of sustainability important for
development ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580018, 21, 26, 32, 38, 40, 43)]
Ans. The issue of sustainability is important for
development because of the following reasons :
(i) Resources remain continuously available for
human use so that cycle of development goes on.
(ii) Reserves of mineral oil and ground water are
depleting with a rapid pace.
(iii) Conservation and preservation have become the
need of the hour for the coming generations.
		
1×3=3
Q. 5. Explain the term ‘sustainable development’.
Suggest two measures to ensure sustainable
development.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580013, 16, 31, 35)]
Ans. Sustainable economic development means
development should take place without damaging
the environment and development in the present
should not compromise with the needs of the
future generation.
		Measures to ensure sustainable development :
(i) We should avoid indiscriminate use of resources.
(ii) We should find the alternative of non-renewable
resources.
1+2=3
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why is sustainable development essential ?
How does it help to prevent environmental
degradation ? [Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JEEVD]



5 marks each
Or
		
Why is sustainable development essential
for economic growth ? Give three reasons.
Suggest also two measures to ensure sustainable
development.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (39)]

140 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Ans. Sustainable development is important for
economic growth because :
(i) Environment must be conserved while
development is taking place.
(ii) Resources must be used in such a way that
something is conserved for future generations.
(iii) The standard of living of all people must be
raised.
Measures to ensure sustainable development :
(i) We should focus on using renewable resources
and keep inventing new techniques to decrease
the use of conventional resources.
(ii) The present resources must be used judiciously,
with planning, and overexploitation should be
avoided. (CBSE Marking Scheme 2015) 3+2=5
Q. 2. Explain
the
importance
of
sustainable
development by giving the example of ground
water.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC), 2013
		
(3K), 2012 (34)]
Or
		 What is sustainable development ? Explain it with
an example of water.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (71)]
Ans. (i) Sustainable development is all about judicious
use of resources at present keeping in mind the
future requirements of the coming generation.
(ii) Ground water is over used for agriculture.
(iii) Water is drawn from wells and this leaves the
underground water-table depleted.
(iv) Since water is a renewable resource, we must
help in replenishing water.
(v) We would be overusing the resources if use more
than what is being replenished.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2013) 1×5=5
Q. 3. What is Sustainable Development ? Explain
any four measures to promote sustainable
development.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (64)]
Ans. Sustainable development : Development without
environmental degradation and with conservation
of resources for the future generation.
		Measures to promote sustainable development :
(i) Increased use of renewable resource.
(ii) Less use of fossil fuels.
(iii) Introduction of organic farming.
(iv) Adopting measures to reduce global warming.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1+4=5

Q. 4. Define Sustainable Development. Write any four
features of Sustainable Development.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (51)]
Ans. Sustainable development maybe defined as
development that meets the needs of the present
generation without compromising the ability of
the future generations to meet their own needs.
		Features :
(i) It is linked to sustainability since it has to be
maintained for future generations.
(ii) Resources are need to be used wisely so that they
can be replenished. For example, if trees are cut
they should also be re-planted and allowed to
grow.
(iii) Overuse of resources which exhaust them. For
example, petroleum. If it is used indiscriminately,
it will soon get finished and future generations
will have nothing left in their hands.
(iv) If development is not sustainable, it will give
rise to environmental degradation and become a
global problem.
(v) People must be protected against pollution,
thereby ensuring their quality of life and health.
(Any four) (CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1+4=5
Q. 5. ‘The earth has enough resources to meet the needs
of all but not enough to satisfy the greed of even
one person’. How is this statement relevant to the
discussion of development ? Explain. [NCERT]
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014, KVS-2014, 2012 (53)]
Ans. This statement is given by Mahatma Gandhi :
(i) It means that the earth has abundant resources
to satisfy everyone’s needs but in our greed
and hurry to develop, we have been recklessly
exploiting these resources.
(ii) In the name of development, we have indulged
in activities such as deforestation, overgrazing,
encroachment into forest lands, overuse of
ground water, use of plastics, etc.
(iii) The exploitation of natural resources not only
harms the environment but may cripple the
future generations of the development process
itself.
(iv) If fossil fuels are exhausted, the development of
all countries would be at risk.
(v) Thus, there is a need for conservation and
judicious use of resources for development.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1×5=5

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. “Sustainability of development is a new area of
knowledge”. Do you agree ? Justify your answer.
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. Yes, we agree with this statement. The reasons are :
(i) Sustainability of development is comparatively
a new area of knowledge in which scientists,
economists, philosophers and other social scientists
are working together.
(ii) In general, the question of development or
progress is perennial.

3-5 marks each
(iii)

At all times, as a member of society and as an
individuals we need to ask where we want to go,
what we wish to become and what our goals are.
so the debate on development continues. 1×3=3

Q. 2. “The future generation may not have sufficient
resources as compared to the present generation”.
Explain the statement by giving suitable
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]

[ 141

DEVELOPMENT

Ans. It is quite true that the future generation may
not have sufficient resources as compared to the
present generation.
(i) The statement explains that the overuse of
resources by the present generation would
lead to insufficiency of resources for the future
generation.

(ii)

Development without adequate resources is
impossible.
(iii) Example :
(a) Nearly one-third of the country is overusing
their ground water resources.
(b) Overusing of fossil fuels like petroleum, coal.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1×3=3



2

CHAPTER

SECTORS OF
THE INDIAN
ECONOMY

Sectors of Economic Activities.
Historical change in sectors, Rising Importance of Tertiary sector in Production.
Employment Generation.
Division of Sectors, Organized and Unorganized.
Protective measures for unorganized sector workers.

QUICK REVIEW
zz
zz

zz
zz

zz
zz
zz
zz

SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

zz
zz

zz

zz
zz

zz
zz
zz

People are engaged in various economic activities
producing goods and services.
TOPIC - 1
Sectors of Economic Activities .... P. 144
Economic activities can be classified in three sectors :
(i) Primary Sector,
TOPIC - 2
(ii) Secondary Sector,
How to create more Employment .... P. 148
(iii) Tertiary Sector
TOPIC - 3
Economic activities, though, are grouped into three
Division of sectors as organized and
different categories, are very much interdependent.
unorganized .... P. 152
The various production activities in primary, secondary
and tertiary sectors produce a large number of goods and
services and employ a large number of people.
The value of final goods and services produced in each sector during a particular year provides the total
production of the sector for that year.
There are not enough job opportunities in the secondary and tertiary sectors.
More than half of the workers in the country are working in the primary sector, especially in agriculture.
The contribution of agriculture in the GDP is only ¼th whereas the secondary and tertiary sector contribute
¾th of the produce.
A study conducted by the Planning Commission of India estimates that nearly 20 lakh jobs can be created
in the education sector alone.
In our country, the Central Government made a law implementing the Right to Work in 200 districts and
then extended to an additional 130 districts. It is called National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
(NREGA, 2005).
On the basis of nature of economic activities, there are two types of sector :
(i) Organized,
(ii) Unorganized
In our country, majority of workers from scheduled castes, tribes and backward communities are working
in the unorganized sector.
On the basis of ownership, economic activities can be classified into two sectors :
(i) Public Sector,
(ii) Private Sector
There are large number of activities which are the primary responsibility of the government. The
government must spend on these activities.
In India nearly half of the children are malnourished and quarter of them are critically ill.
Government needs to pay attention on availability of safe drinking water, housing facilities for poor, food
and nutrition etc.

SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY

[ 143

KNOW THE TERMS
zzClassification

of sectors of the Indian economy :

(i) On the basis of nature of activities :
		 (a) Primary Sector
		 (b) Secondary Sector
		 (c) Tertiary Sector
(ii) On the basis of ownership :
		 (a) Private sector
		 (b) Public Sector
zzPrimary

Sector : It includes all those economic activities which are connected with extraction and production of
natural resources, e.g., agriculture, fishing, mining etc.

zzSecondary Sector : It includes all those economic activities which are related to manufacturing process, e.g., mining

of iron ore is primary activity but manufacturing of steel is secondary activity.
zzTertiary

Sector : It is the sector which is related to activities like transportation, banking insurance etc.

zzFinal

Product : It is the goods which are ready for consumption and are called final product, for example, bread
which is ready for consumption.

zzIntermediate

: All goods which are used as raw material for further production of goods, or for resale in the same
year are known as intermediate goods. For example, flour which will be used for production of bread, so flour is
an intermediate product.

zzG.D.P.

(Gross Domestic Product) : It is the value of only final goods and services produced within the domestic
territory of a country.

zzUnemployment

: When the person is willing to work at the prevailing wage rate but he/she is not getting a job it
is called unemployment.

zzTypes

of unemployment :

(i) Seasonal unemployment
(ii) Disguised unemployment
zzSeasonal

unemployment : The unemployment which generates due to the variation in season is called seasonal
unemployment. It is mostly seen in agricultural sector.

zzDisguised

unemployment : When more people are working than its requirement then it is called disguised
unemployment. So, even if we remove few people from the job, the process of production will not be affected, it is
also called underemployment.

zzOrganised sector : People have assured work and terms of employment are regular. Rules and regulations given in

various laws are registered by the government.
zzUnorganised

sector : It consists of small and scattered units which are not in the control of the government. It has
low pay and unsecured jobs.

zzMNREGA

: Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. It will provide 100 days assured
employment to all needy and unemployed workers. If they are unable to provide employment then they would
provide unemployment allowances.

KNOW THE LINKS
1. Innovation through ICT in MG NREGA 2005
		http://www.nrega.net
2. India’s GDP over the years
		http://www.indexmundi.com

144 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

FLOWCHART

TOPIC-1

Sectors of Economic Activities
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Under which economic sector does the production
of a commodity through the natural process come ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2015, 2014,
				
Set-C5JWEVD (WQ7FXWC), (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. Primary sector.
1
Q. 2. Where is the disguised unemployment formed
mostly ?
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. Agriculture sector. Casual workers in the service
sector.
1
Q. 3. A.T.M. is an example of which sector ?
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-DDE]
Ans. Service sector.

1

Q. 4. In which sector are natural products changed into
form through ways of manufacturing ?
				

[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]

Ans. Secondary.

1

Q. 5. In which sector is seasonal and disguised
unemployment most prevalent in India ?.
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-M]
Ans. Agriculture Sector

1

Q. 6. Mention the share of tertiary sector in terms of
GDP in 2003 ?
[School of Scholars Yavatmal, 2015 ][NCERT]
Ans. Between 50-60%

1

Q. 7. Which sector helps in the development of the
primary and secondary sector ?
				

[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOKG2SB]

Ans. Service /Tertiary sector.

1

1 mark each

Q. 8. Which sector includes activities that help in
the development of the primary and secondary
sector ?
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. Tertiary sector.
1
Q. 9. Name the sector which continued to be the largest
employer even in the year 2000. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. Primary sector.
1
Q. 10. What do final goods and services mean ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Ans. Total production of the sectors.
1
Q. 11. Which sector had the highest share in GDP in
2003 ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Tertiary sector.
1
Q. 12. In which sector is manufacturing included ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Secondary sector.
1
Q. 13. Which sector had the highest share in GDP in
2003 ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Tertiary sector.
1
Q. 14. In which sector is manufacturing included ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, DDE-2014]
Ans. Secondary sector.
1
Q. 15. Write three activities which belong to the primary
sector.
Ans. Agriculture, dairy and mining.
1
Q. 16. Sahara Airlines and B.S.E.S. are examples of
which sector ?
Ans. Private sector.
1
Q. 17. Write three activities which belong to the primary
sector.
Ans. Agriculture, dairy and mining.
1
Q. 18. Which sector generates services rather than
goods ?

[ 145

SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY

Ans. Tertiary.

1

Q. 19. Which communities generally find them in the
unorganized sector ?
Ans. Schedule tribes and backward communities.
Q. 20. Services such as transport, banking and insurance
come under which sector ?
Ans. Tertiary sector.
1
Q. 21. Railway is an example of which sector ?
Ans. Public sector.
1

1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Explain any three reasons for the Primary Sector
to be the largest employer in India.		
		
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. Primary sector continues to be the largest
employer because :
(i) Enough jobs have not been created by the
secondary and Tertiary sector.
(ii) In the Tertiary sector through the production has
risen almost 11 times but employment has grown
only 3 times.
(iii) Not employed any where else flocks to the
primary sector.
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 2. Classify the economic sectors on the basis of
nature of activities. Mention the main feature of
each.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE), 2012 (33)]
Or
		
Explain the three sectors of economic
activities with the help of examples.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012, 13, 27, 28, 31, 32, 43)]
Or
		Explain the primary, secondary and tertiary
sectors by giving examples of each.
		
[Board Term 1, 2010 (B1)]
		How are the three sector of the economy different
from each other ? Explain.
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-6AP67LB]
Ans. Classification of economic sectors on the basis of
nature of activities are as follows :
(i) Primary sector : When we produce goods by
exploiting natural resources, it is an activity of the
primary sector, such as agriculture, dairy farming,
fishing, forestry.
(ii) Secondary sector : In this, natural products are
changed into other forms through manufacturing
that we associate with industrial activity. The
product is not produced by nature but has
to be made and therefore, some process of
manufacturing is essential. For example, using
cotton fibre from the plant we spin, yarn and
weave cloth.
(iii) Tertiary sector : It helps in the development of
the primary and secondary sectors. They provide
aid or a support for the production process.
Transport, storage, communication, banking,
trade are some examples of tertiary activities
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 3. What constitutes the unorganised sector in
urban areas ? Why do workers in this sector need
protection ?
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
Ans. In the urban areas, unorganised sector comprises
workers in small scale industry, casual workers
in construction, trade and transport etc. It also


3 marks each
includes street vendors, head load workers,
garment markers, rag pickers etc.
		
Workers in this sector need protection from over
exploitation, differential treatment because of
belonging to SC and ST.
3
Q. 4. Explain the meaning of tertiary sector. Mention
any four economic activities of this sector.
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. Tertiary Sector : These are activities that help in
the development of the primary and secondary
sectors. These activities, by themselves, do not
produce a good but they are an aid or a support for
the production process.
		Four economic activities of this sector are —
banking, transport, storage, communication etc. 3
Q. 5. How does service sector in India provide different
kinds of services? Explain.
				 [Board Term 1, 2014 (NCERT)(WQ7FXWC)]
Or
		Explain how does the public sector contribute to
the economic development of a nation ?
				
[NCERT][Board Term 1, 2011 (580020, 36)]
Ans. Public sector contributes to the economic
development of a nation by the following ways :
(i) Public sector provides many essential things at
a reasonable cost, which private sector cannot
provide.
(ii) The public sector can set up heavy industry which
require a lot of money.
(iii) The purpose of the Public sector is not to earn
money, but to benefit the people.
(iv) Public sectors are controlled by the government,
provides health and educational facilities.
				
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 6. Describe the contribution of three sectors in
Indian economy.
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. (i) All the three sectors–primary, secondary and
tertiary of economy are interdependent.
(ii) The various production activities in the three
sectors produce a very large number of goods and
services.
(iii) The three sectors have a large number of people
working in them to produce thee goods and
services.
Q. 7. Classify the sectors of economy on the basis of
ownership.
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		How are the economic activities classified on
the basis of ownership ? Explain with suitable
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (59)]

146 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Or
		Differentiate between public and private sectors. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (74)]
Or
		Differentiate between the public and private
sectors in an economy with examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (49)]
Ans. Public Sector :
(i) The government owns most of the assets and
provides all the services.
(ii) The purpose of the public sector is not first to
earn profits. Government raises money through
taxes to meet expenses on the services rendered
by it.
(iii) Railways or post office is an example of the public
sector.
Private Sector :
(i) Ownership of assets and delivery of services is in
the hands of private individuals or companies.
(ii) Activities in the private sector are guided by
the motive to earn profit. To get such services
we have to pay money to these individuals and
companies.
(iii) Tata Iron and Steel Company (TISCO) or Reliance
Industries Ltd.(RIL) are examples of private
sector.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3
Q. 8. “All of the service sector is not growing equally
well in India.” Justify the statement with three
arguments.
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
Or
		Service sector in India employs two types of
people. Explain by giving suitable examples.
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580021)]
Ans. (i) Service sector in India employs many different
kinds of people. At one end there are a limited
number of services that employ highly skilled and
educated workers, such as managers, lawyers,
accountants, etc.
(ii) At the other end, there are a very large number
of workers engaged in services, such as small
shopkeepers, repair persons, transport persons.
These people barely manage to earn a living and
yet perform these services.
(iii) There is no alternative opportunity for them. Only
a part of this sector is growing in importance.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1 × 3 = 3

Q. 9. How would income and employment increase
if farmers are provided with loan, irrigation and
transportation facilities ? 
[Board Term 1, 2012 (36, 37)]
Ans. (i) Loan provided can be used to construct a well,
or to buy better quality of seeds and pesticides.
(ii) Irrigation will help to have a second crop after the
first one, even in the absence of monsoon.
(iii) Transportation facility will facilitate taking their
produce to the market to sell.
1×3=3
Q. 10. Explain the interdependence of all the three
economic sectors giving examples from
transportation system. [Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Or
		How are all the three sectors of the economy
interdependent ? Explain this interdependence
with the help of an example.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (48)]
Ans. All the three sectors are highly interdependent on
each other :
(i) All that is produced in the primary sector is of no use
until it undergoes a change into finished product
which is not possible without transportation.
(ii) Secondary sector is the manufacturing sector.
To make these products and to sell them in the
market, we need transportation.
(iii) For moving from primary to secondary sector and
further to the market, requires services of trades at
different places and require many other services.
For all this we cannot think of working without
transportation.
1×3=3
Q. 11. How is tertiary sector different from other
sectors? Give examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580022, 29, 37, 45)]
Ans. Tertiary sector is different from other sectors in
the following ways :
(i) Primary sector includes all those activities which
result in output of natural products.
(ii) Secondary sector includes activities which produce
a new product by transforming the shape of a
natural product.
(iii) Tertiary activities neither produce any natural
product nor transform shape of natural products,
it only supports the activities in both sectors. Steel
produced in a Factory has to move long distance.
It can be done by a strong network of tertiary
activities.
1 × 3 =3
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. “When a country develops, the contribution of
primary sector declines and that of secondary and
tertiary sector increases.” Analyse the statement. 		
Or
		Describe the historical changes that have taken
place in the sectors of the economy in the
developed countries.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (74)]
				
[School of Scholars, Yavatmal, 2015]

SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY

Ans. (a) In the initial stages of development, the
primary sector was the most important sector
of economic activity. As the methods of farming
changed and agriculture sector began to prosper,
people began to take up other activities.
(b) New methods of manufacturing were introduced,
factories came up and started expanding.
(c) The Secondary sector gradually became the most
important in total production and employment.
(d) With the development of areas like transport
and administration the service sector kept on
growing. In the past 100 years, there has been a
shift from the secondary to the tertiary sector in
developed countries.
(e) The service sector has become the most important
in terms of total production and employment.
This is the general pattern observed in developed
countries.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1 × 5 = 5
Q. 2. There has been a big change in the three sectors
of economic activities, but a similar shift has not
taken place in the share of employment. Explain
the above statement on the basis of facts. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (48)]
				
[Board Term 1, 2015 Set-DDE]
Ans. (i) Industrial output has increased by 8 times but
employment in the sector has increased only by
2-5 times.
(ii) In the tertiary sector, the production of services
rose by 11 times but employment in the services
rose only by 3 times.
(iii) More than half of the workers in the country are
working in the primary sector producing only
one quarter of the goods.
(iv) Secondary and tertiary sectors produce three
fourths of the produce whereas they only employ
half of the country’s workers.
(v) Primary sector has disguised employment
whereas workers in secondary and tertiary
sectors work overtime.
1×5=5
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012)
Q. 3. Define tertiary sector. Describe about the different
kinds of people employed in this sector in India. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (WQ7FXWC)]
Ans. Tertiary Sector : It helps in the development of the
primary and secondary sectors. They provide aid
or support for the production process.
Different kinds of people employed in this sector
because it provides a lots of opportunity for job.
(i) At one end there are a limited number of services
that employ highly skilled and educated workers.
(ii) At the other end, there are a very large number
of workers engaged in services such as small
shopkeepers, repair persons, transporters etc.
		
2 + 1½ + 1½ = 5
Q. 4. Explain the importance of the service sector. 		
		
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Or
		Explain any five features of tertiary sector ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580014, 33)]

[ 147
Ans. The main features of the tertiary sectors are :
(i) This sector helps in the development of the primary
and secondary sectors.
(ii) The activities related to this sector do not produce
key good but they are an aid or a support for the
production process.
(iii) It also provides essential services that may not
directly help in the production of goods such as
services of teachers, doctors, barbers, lawyers etc.
(iv) In recent times, certain new services based on
information technology etc have become more
important.
(v) The services which are included in the tertiary
sectors are transport, storage, communication,
banking, trade etc.
1×5=5
Q. 5. Explain any five reasons for the growth of service
sector in India.
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3)]
Or
		
Why is tertiary sector becoming the most
important sector in India ? Given four reasons.
		 [Board Term 1, 2013 (105), 2011 (580026, 45)]
Or
		Evaluate the rising importance of tertiary sector
over the years.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Or
		Explain reasons for the rising importance of the
Tertiary sector in India. [Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]
Or
		How far is it correct to say that in recent past,
India has experienced some significant changes
in the contribution to GDP by the service sector ?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]
Or
		Explain why service sector is gaining more
importance in the global economy.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (74)]
Or
		Why is the Tertiary sector growing so rapidly in
India ? Explain it with four reasons.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012, 19, 24, 28, 40, 42)
		
2010 B1]
Ans. Tertiary sector in India has been growing rapidly
for a number of reasons :
(i) In a developing country, the government has
to take the responsibility for the provision of
basic services for example, hospitals, educational
institutions, post and telegraph services, police
stations, courts, village administrative offices,
municipal corporations, defence, transport, banks,
insurance companies etc.
(ii) The development of agriculture and industry
leads to the development of services such as trade,
transport, storage etc. Greater the development of
the primary and secondary sectors, more would be
the demand for such services.
(iii) As income levels rise, certain sections of people
start demanding many more services, such as
eating out, tourism, shopping, private hospitals;
private schools, professional training etc. This
change was quite sharp in cities, especially in big
cities.

148 ]
(iv)

(v)
(vi)

(vii)

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Over the past decade or so, certain new
services, such as those based on information
and communication technology have become
important and essential.
Government policy of privatisation has also led to
growth of this sector.
A large number of workers are engaged in services,
such as small shopkeepers, repair persons,
transport persons etc.
However, the entire sector has not grown. Large
numbers of people engaged as construction
workers, maid, peons, small shopkeepers etc. do
not find any change in their life.
(Any five)
1×5=5

Q. 6. What is the significance of secondary sector
in Indian economy ? How does it help in the
economic development of the country ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580011, 23)]
Ans. The significance of secondary sector is that it
transforms raw material into commodities. It is the
second largest sector of our country.
		Role in Economic development :
(i) Secondary sector uses mechanical power and
modern use of labour.
(ii) It provides employment to a large number of
people.
(iii)

It also helps in creating self-sufficiency in
the country. It produces goods for local and
international consumers.
2+3=5

HOTS Questions
Q.1. How far is it correct to say that several services
which cannot be provided by private sector can be
provided by the public sector ? Explain. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2013 (H3), 2012 (60)]
Or
		“There are several things needed by the society as
a whole.” In the light of this statement, explain as
to who can provide them at a reasonable cost the
private or the public sector and why ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (35)]
Or
		Identify any five activities where the government
must spend for the welfare of the people and
why ?
[Board Term 1, 2012 (56)]
Ans.		Society needs many things as a whole which
the private sector is not be able to provide at a
reasonable cost. The reasons are as follows :
(i) Some of them need spending large sums of
money which is beyond the capacity of the
private sector.

3-5 marks each
(ii)

The private sector charges are very high whereas
the government will charge reasonably.
(iii) Without government’s encouragement and help,
the private sector can’t enter into such services.
		
Areas where the government must spend for
the welfare of the people are :
(i) Providing health and education facilities by
building proper schools.
(ii) Providing proper food to tackle the problem of
malnourishment.
(iii) Government also needs to pay attention to the
aspects of human development such as safe
drinking water, housing, and taking care of the
poorest.
(iv) Safe drinking water must be made available to all.
(v) Housing facilities must be provided to the
homeless.
(vi) It is the duty of the Government to take care of
ignored and backward regions of the country to
bring balanced growth development in the entire
country.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2013) 5

TOPIC-2

How to create more Employment
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. What is GDP (Gross Domestic Product) ?
				

[Board Term 1, NCT-2014 (R9UJGYG)]

Ans. It is the value of final goods and services produced
within the domestic territory of a country.
1
Q. 2. What does GDP stand for ?		
		
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
Ans. Gross Domestic Product.
1
Q. 3. Give full form of NREGA.


1 mark each

Ans.
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act.
1
Q. 4.
What do you mean by disguised unemployment ?
Ans.
More people engaged in a job than needed.
1
Q. 5.
For how many days employment is guaranteed
under NREGA 2005 ?
Ans. 100 days.
1
Q. 6. When was Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act implemented?
Ans. 2005.
1

[ 149

SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY

Q. 7. In terms of G.D.P., what was the share of tertiary
sector in 2003 ?
Ans. Between 50 to 60%.
1

Q. 8. The Government of India has implemented the
‘Right to Work’, in how many district ?
Ans. 330 districts.
1

Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why is NREGA also called the right to work ?
Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2014 (X30T4XE)]
Or
		 Explain the role of NREGA is creating employment
for the people in India. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]

3 marks each
Ans. (i) Unemployment : When a person is willing to
work at the prevailing wage rate but fails to get a
job, it is called unemployment.
(ii)

Or
		Why is NREGA also called the “Right to Work”?
Mention any three reasons for it. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (34)]
Or
		In your opinion, how far is it correct to say that
NREGA 2005 as “Right to Work”? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (55)]

Q. 4. Explain the concept of under employment taking
example from some non-agricultural field. 		
		
[Board Term 1, KVS-2014]
Ans. The under employment can happen in other
sectors, for example :
(i)

There are thousand of casual workers in the
service sector in urban areas who search for daily
employment.

(ii)

They are employed as pointers, plumbers, repair
persons and other doing odd jobs. Many of them
don’t find work everyday.

(iii)

Similarly, we see other people of the service sector
on the street pushing a cart or selling something
where they may spend the whole day but earn
very little.
1×3=3

Ans.		NREGA is also called Right to Work :
(i)

It has been implemented in 200 poorest of the
poor districts of India.

(ii)

NREGA guarantees 100 days of assured work to
the people who are able and in need of work.

(iii)

If the government fails to provide work, it will
provide unemployment allowances to the people.

(iv) One-third of the jobs are reserved for women.
(Any three) (CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 3
Q. 2. State the objectives of NREGA 2005. 		
		
[Board Term 1, NCT 2014)
Or
		
Explain the objectives of implementing the
MGNREGA 2005.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (37, 39)]
Or
		
Explain the objectives of Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (52)]

Q. 5. What is GDP ? Explain with example the method
of calculating Gross Domestic Product. 		
		
[Board TerM 1, 2013 (3K), 2012 (58)]
Or
		Explain the term G.D.P. Why are only ‘final goods
and services’ counted in G.D.P. ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580018, 22, 24, 36)]
Ans. G.D.P. is the sum of the money value of final goods
and services produced in each sector during a
particular year within domestic territory of a
country.

Or
		What has been the role of MGNREGA in creating
employment for the people in India ? 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (45)]
Ans.		Objectives of implementing MGNREGA 2005 :
(i) To give employment opportunities to the people
who live in rural areas.
(ii) To raise the standard of living of the people.
(iii) To implement the right to work.
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1 × 3 =3
Q. 3. Explain the term ‘unemployment’. What is
disguised unemployment.
		
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]

Disguised unemployment : When more people
are working than required, it is called disguised
unemployment. Even if we remove a few people
from the job, the process of production will not be
affected.
1½ + 1½

Only final goods and services are counted in
G.D.P. because :
(i)

The value of final goods already includes the value
of all intermediate goods.

(ii)

To count the value of the flour and wheat
separately is therefore not correct because then we
would be counting the value of the same things a
number of times.
1+2=3

Q. 6. Explain the ways by which more employment can
be created in a country like India. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580020, 23, 31)]
Ans. The ways by which more employment can be
created in a country like India are :

150 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

(i)

If more dams are built and canal water is provided
to all the small farmers, a lot of employment can be
generated in agriculture sector.

(iii)

(ii)

Providing cheap credit facilities and crop insurance
can result in more employment.

More money should be spent in transport
and storage, because then more people can be
employed.
The government/banks can provide loan at cheap
rates to improve irrigational facilities.
Technical training, vocational guidance to
unemployed youth for self employment.
(Any three) 1 × 3 = 3

(iv)
(v)

Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Why is agriculture the most labour absorbing sector
in India ? How does disguised unemployment
make it worse ? Explain with an example.
		
[Board Term 1, 2014 (R9UJGYG)]
Ans. (i) Agriculture is the most labour absorbing sector
in India because the secondary and tertiary sectors
are still failed to provide more employment
opportunities as to a majority of the Indian people,
so the people are forced to engage themselves in
agriculture.
(ii) Disguised unemployment it generally found in
agriculture sector. People engaged in farming are
generally more than required. Though it seems
that they are working in the cultivation of land but
actually they are partly employed.
(iii) For example : A farmer who has a land of 3 hectare
which require only 2 persons for farming related to
work but all the 7 family members are engaged in
it. If 5 persons out of them are with drawn from the
job, the total production will not fall. Therefore, 5
persons will come under the category of disguised
unemployment.
5
Q. 2. Describe the estimates of Planning Commission
to create jobs in tourism and education ?
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (63)]
Ans. Regarding jobs in Schools :
(i) Planning commission estimates that nearly 20 lakh
jobs can be created in education sector alone.
(ii) For more children to attend school, more teachers
and more infrastructure will be required.
Regarding jobs in Tourism :
(i) Planning commission estimates that nearly 35 lakh
jobs can be created in tourism sector.
(ii) Regional crafts and Cottage industry can also
create jobs.
(iii) New services such as IT also are job generators.
2+3=5
Q. 3. What is GDP? Explain the process to calculate
GDP.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (82)]
Ans. (i) Gross Domestic Product or GDP is the value
of all final goods and services produced within a
country, during a particularly year.
(ii) The sum of production in the three sectors give us
the GDP (primary + secondary + tertiary). The
money values of goods and services should be
added rather than adding up the actual numbers.
The value of final goods alone should be added as
the value of intermediate goods is already included
in the value of final goods. This mammoth task
of measuring GDP is undertaken by the Central
Government Ministry.
This organization collects information relating to
the total volume of goods and services and their
prices and then estimates the GDP.
2+3=5
5 marks each

Q. 4.
How can we create more employment in secondary
and tertiary sectors in rural India ? 		
		
Ans.
(ii)

(iii)
(iv)
(v)



[Board Term 1, 2012 (45, 47)]
(i) We can create more jobs in the secondary sector
by promoting industries such as dal mills.
By promoting cottage and handicraft industries
to employ the villagers. By tying up industries to
promote processing of vegetables and fruits.
Government can invest in cold storages.
Services like transportation and communication
must be promoted to generate employment.
Building Multi-purpose Projects can create
employment.
Q. 5.
How can we create more employment
opportunities in urban areas ? Explain with
examples.
[Board Term 1, 2012 (72)]

Ans. Ways to increase employment opportunities in
urban areas :
(i) If credit is provided cheaply and easily, it will
encourage the setting up of small-scale business,
or self-employment.
(ii) If educational facilities are improved and schools
are set up more jobs in education line will be
created and those educated will also find jobs.
(iii) By improving health facilities, setting up hospitals
in rural and urban areas employment will be
generated in the health sector.
(iv) Tourism must be promoted so that ancillary
business generated will bring employment.
(v) Small scale industries must be encouraged and
developed.
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 1 × 5 =5
Q. 6. Explain measures that can be adopted to remove
disguised unemployment in the agriculture
sector.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580021, 27)]
Ans. When more people are compelled to do a job which
only few can do, then such a situation is termed as
disguised unemployment.
(i) One or two members of farmer’s family can work
in the farms of big landlord and earn wages.
(ii) Two or three members of such a family may move
to work in a nearby factory and earn more money.
(iii) More irrigational facilities can be provided to grow
two or three crops in a year.

[ 151

SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY

(iv)

(v)
Q. 7.

Ans.

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

By opening processing units of agriculture
production, more employment opportunities can
be created.
Technical, vocational training can reduce the
unemployment of farmers.
Explain measures that can be adopted to remove
disguised unemployment in the agriculture
sector.
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580021, 27)]
When more people are compelled to do a job which
only few can do, then such a situation is termed as
disguised unemployment.
One or two members of farmer’s family can work
in the farms of big landlord and earn wages.
Two or three members of such a family may move
to work in a nearby factory and earn more money.
More irrigational facilities can be provided to grow
two or three crops in a year.
By opening processing units of agriculture
production, more employment opportunities can
be created.

(v)

Technical, vocational training can reduce the
unemployment of farmers.
1 × 5 =5
Q. 8. Explain the meaning of disguised unemployment
with the help of any two suitable examples. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2010 (B1)]
Ans. Disguised unemployment : When the people
are working in any field for more than their
labour necessity. For example, where the need
is for 4 labourers and 7 labourers are working, it
means 3 labourers are suffering from disguised
unemployment or under-employment. In such a
case, the production will not be affected even if the
three extra labour do not work.
		Examples :
(i) In rural India, agricultural field is suffering from
this type of unemployment. More than half of the
workers in the country are working in primary
sector mainly in agricultural activities producing
only a quarter of G.D.P.
(ii) In urban areas, workers like painters, plumbers,
repair persons, cart drivers do not find work every
day or for the whole day.
3+2=5

Value Based Questions
Q. 1. Describe the provisions of “National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act’’, 2005.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (68)]
Ans. Provisions of NREGA 2005 are:
(i) It provides 100 days assured employment every
year to each rural household.
(ii) One-third of the proposed jobs are reserved for
women.
(iii) If an applicant is not employed within 15 days
he/she is entitled to a daily unemployment
allowance.
(iv) The governments have to establish Central
Employment Guarantee Funds and State
Employment Guarantee Funds for the
implementation of the scheme.
(v) The scheme is to be extended to 600 districts
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 5
Q. 2. How to create more employment in rural areas ?
Explain with the help of five suitable examples. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (33)]
Or
		How can more employment opportunities be
created in the rural areas ? 		
[Board Term 1, 2011 (580016, 32, 35, 44), 2010 (C1)]

3-5 marks each
Ans. (i) Government can spend money or banks can
provide loan for irrigation.
(ii) Suppose one hectare of wheat can provide
employment to the people for 50 days. So, the
number of members can be increased.
		
Examples :
(i) Construction of new dams and canals.
Constructing dams, canals or digging wells in
villages. On one hand, this would serve the needs
of farmers for irrigation and on the other, people
engaged in such construction activity would gain
employment.
(ii) Development in transport facility by government
and creating storage facilities in rural areas.
(iii) Credit from local banks, so that crops can be
grown every year.
(iv) Agro-based industries can be set up in rural areas
or semi-rural belts.
(v) Making provisions for education and health
services in rural belts can also result in
employments.
(Any three) (CBSE Marking Scheme 2012) 5

HOTS Questions
Q. 1. “Agriculture had been the backbone of the
Indian economy. But the declining share of
agriculture in the GDP is now a matter of serious
concern.” Explain the meaning of this statement.
		
[Board Term 1, 2010 (C2)]
Ans. Agriculture is the backbone of the Indian economy
because :

3-5 marks each
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

In India, about 63% people were engaged in
agriculture sector in 2001.
Share in GDP was more than 40% in 1973.
Raw materials for secondary sectors are mostly
supplied by agriculture.

152 ]

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

		
But now, the share of agriculture is declining in
the GDP year by year. So, it is a matter of serious
concern for all.
(iv) Share of agriculture in the G.D.P. has declined
from 44% to 24% during 1973 to 2003.

(v)

The primary sector continues to be the largest
employer even in 2000 but the production has not
increased by this rate.

TOPIC-3

Division of sectors as organized and
unorganized
Very Short Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. How does public sector help in the development
of a country ?
Ans. Public sector invests in key and basic industries
as health education defence where private sector
cannot invest. [CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1
Q. 2. “What is the intention of the government in
raising money through taxes ?”
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]

1 mark each

Ans. Government raise money through taxes and other
ways to meet expenses on the services rendered by
it.		
1
Q. 3. Who has the ownership of the assets in the public
sector ?
1
Ans. Government.
Q. 4. What does comprise the unorganised sector in
rural areas ? [Board Term 1, 2015, Set-XOKG2SB]
Ans. Agriculture.
1

Short Answer Type Questions

3 marks each

Q. 1. Why do people prefer to work in an organized
sector ? Explain.
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-6AP67LB]

(ii)

Ans.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Q. 3. Why is agriculture an activity of unorganised
sector in India ? Explain.

Advantages of organized sector :
People enjoy security of employment.
Work for fixed hours.
It they work more they get overtime allowances.
Paid leaves, payment during holidays, medical
benefits safe working environment and pension
after retirement.
Or (any other relevant point)
(Any three)
[CBSE Marking Scheme, 2015] 1 × 3 =3

Q. 2. What are the differences in the employment
conditions between organized and unorganized
sectors of the economy ?

[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		Agriculture is an unorganized sector in India.
Do you agree with this statement ? Justify your
answer with suitable examples. 		
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (40)]
Ans. In agriculture activities, people are exploited like
landless labourers.
(i)

OR

(ii)

		In what three ways is organised sector better than
unorganized sector ? Explain.

(iii)

				

[School of Scholars 2015]

Ans. Organized sector :
(i)

Workers in the organized sector enjoy security of
employment.

(ii)

Workers get several benefits from the employers
like paid leave, provident fund, gratuity, etc.

(iii)

Workers work for a fixed number of hours. If they
work more, they have to be paid overtime by the
employer.
Unorganized sector :

(i)

Employment is subject to high degree of unsecurity.

There is no provision for paid leave, holidays, etc.

(iii) Workers get less wages and there is no provision
for overtime payment.
1½ + 1½

Their income level is low.
There is no job security.
Agriculture is seasonal in nature and there is no
fixed pay.

(iv) No other benefits such as pension, medical facility,
paid leave, Provident Fund, safe environment
etc. are available.
(Any three)
(CBSE Marking Scheme, 2012) 1 × 3 = 3
Q. 4. How can the workers in the unorganised sector be
protected ? Explain.
				

[Board Term 1, 2011 (580012, 28, 33, 38)]

Ans. In the unorganised sector, mostly landless
agricultural labourers, small and marginal farmers,
share croppers and artisans are included. These
workers can be protected by the following ways :

[ 153

SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY

(i)

(ii)

Farmers need to be supported through adequate
facility for timely delivery of seeds, agriculture
inputs, credit, storage and marketing outlets.
In urban areas, casual workers need government’s
support for procuring raw material.

Small scale industries also need support for
procuring raw material and marketing of the
goods.
1×3=3
Long Answer Type Questions
Q. 1. Differentiate between organised and unorganised
sector.
[Board Term 1, NCT-2014]
OR
		Compare the employment conditions prevailing
in the organised and the unorganised sector ?
				
[Board Term 1, DDE-2015, Set-E]
				
[Board Term 1, 2015, Set-C5JWEVD]
Ans. Organised Sector :
(i) It is the one where the terms of employment are
regular and people have assured work.
(ii) They are registered by the government and have
to follow its rules and regulations which are given
in various laws such as the factories Act, Minimum
Wages Act etc.
(iii) It is called organised because it has some processed
and procedures.
(iv) Workers in the organised sector enjoy security of
employment. They are expected to work only a fix
number of hours. If they work more, they have to
be paid overtime by the employer.
(v) They also get several other benefits from the
employers like paid leave, payment during
holidays, provident fund, pensions, gratuity,
medical benefits etc.
		Unorganised Sector :
(i) These are small and scattered units which are
largely outside the control of the government.
(ii) There are rules and regulations but these are not
followed.
(iii) Jobs here are low-paid and often not regular.
(iv) Employment is not secure as people can be asked
to leave without any reason.
(v) There is no provision for overtime, paid leave,
holidays, leave due to sickness etc.
Examples :
(i) In a developing country, the government has
to take the responsibility for the provision of
basic services for example, hospitals, educational
institutions, post and telegraph services, police
stations, courts, village administrative offices,
municipal corporations, defence, transport, banks,
insurance companies etc.
(ii) The development of agriculture and industry
leads to the development of services such as trade,
transport, storage etc. Greater the development of
the primary and secondary sectors, more would be
the demand for such services.
(iii) As income levels rise, certain sections of people
start demanding many more services, such as

(iii)


5 marks each
eating out, tourism, shopping, private hospitals;
private schools, professional training, etc. This
change was quite sharp in cities, especially in big
cities.
(iv) Over the past decade or so, certain new
services, such as those based on information
and communication technology have become
important and essential.
(v) Government policy of Privatisation has also led to
growth of this sector.
(vi) A large number of workers are engaged in services,
such as small shopkeepers, repair persons,
transport persons, etc.
(vii) However, the entire sector has not grown. Large
numbers of people engaged as construction
workers, maid, peons, small shopkeepers etc. do
not find any change in their life.
(Any five) 1 × 5 = 5
Q. 2. “Workers are not exploited in organised sector”.
Do you agree with the statement ? Explain reasons
in support of your answer.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (38)]
Or
		 What is unorganised sector ? Describe the working
procedure of this sector. [Outside Delhi 2008 I]
Or
		Workers are exploited in an unorganised sector.
Do you agree with this statement ? Justify your
answer with five relevant points.
				
[Board Term 1, 2012 (39, 40)]
Or
		Define the term ‘Unorganised Sector’. Mention
any six disadvantages of working in this sector.
		
[Board Term 1, 2012 (70)]
Ans. Unorganised Sector : Unorganized sector is a
sector which has small and scattered units largely
outside the control of the government.
Yes, workers are exploited in the unorganised
sector. Reasons are as follows :
(i) There are no rules and regulations followed.
(ii) Jobs are low paid and often not regular
(iii) No provision of overtime is there and no paid
holidays or leave is given.
(iv) Employment is not secure. People can be asked to
leave without reason.
(v) Some kind of work is seasonal in nature and
temporary workers are employed. They become
unemployed after the season is over.
(vi) No other facilities like Provident Fund, Gratuity
or sick leave are given.

154 ]
(vii)

Oswaal CBSE (CCE) Question Bank (Term-1), SOCIAL SCIENCE, Class – 10

Working conditions are often poor. No allowances
are given.
(viii) No medical benefit is given. (Any four) 1 + 4 = 5
(CBSE Marking Scheme 2012)
Q. 3. Under employment and disguised unemployment
are not the same thing.
Or
		Explain the meaning of disguised unemployment
with the help of any two suitable examples.
				
[Board Term 1, 2010 (B1)]
Ans. Disguised unemployment : When the people
are working in any field for more than their
labour necessity. For example, where the need

is for 4 labourers and 7 labourers are working, it
means 3 labourers are suffering from disguised
unemployment or under-employment. In such a
case, the production will not be affected even if the
three extra labour do not work.
		Examples :
(i) In rural India, agricultural a sector is suffering from
this type of unemployment. More than half of the
workers in the country are working in primary
sector mainly in agricultural activities producing
only a quarter of G.D.P.
(ii) In urban areas, workers like painters, plumbers,
repair persons, cart drivers do not find work every
day or for the whole day.
5



1

UNIT – I

