NCERT Book Solutions For Class 9 Geography Chapter 5 – CBSE Term II Free PDF Download
NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5 Natural Vegetation and Wildlife is one of the important resource for students. Going through the solutions help students to get better equipped in expressing their answers in the CBSE Term II exam. It helps them prepare more effectively for the exam. Here, we have provided the NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5 Natural Vegetation and Wildlife. These solutions are created by subject experts, exclusively for Class 9 students. Referring to these answers will help students to score good marks in the CBSE Term II exam.
Download NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5 Natural Vegetation and Wildlife
NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Social Studies (Geography) Chapter 5 – Natural Vegetation and Wildlife
The Solutions for Chapter 5 of Geography are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 9 for other subjects.
Exercise Page No 51
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below: 
(i) To which one of the following types of vegetation does rubber belong to? 
(a) Tundra (b) Himalayan (c) Tidal (d) Tropical Evergreen 
Answer:
Tropical Evergreen
(ii) Cinchona trees are found in the areas of rainfall more than 
(a) 100 cm (b) 70 cm (c) 50 cm (d) less than 50 cm 
Answer:
100 cm
(iii) In which of the following state is the Simlipal bio-reserve located? 
(a) Punjab (b) Delhi (c) Odisha (d) West Bengal 
Answer:
Odisha
(iv) Which one of the following bio-reserves of India is not included in the world network of bio reserve? 
(a) Manas (b) Gulf of Mannar (c) Nilgiri (d) Nanda Devi
Answer:
Manas
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) What factors are responsible for the distribution of plants and animals in India? 
Answer:
Climatic conditions:
Relief:
(ii) What is a bio-reserve? Give two examples. 
Answer:
Bio-reserves are protected areas. This is done to protect natural vegetation, wildlife and the environment.
2 examples:
(iii) Name two animals having habitat in the tropical and montane type of vegetation.
Answer:
Tropical:
Tiger, Elephant.
Montane:
Snow Leopard
3. Distinguish between 
(i) Flora and Fauna 
Answer:
Plant species of a particular region is called flora and animal species of a particular region is called fauna.
(ii) Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous forests
Answer:
Tropical Evergreen Forests:
Tropical Deciduous Forests:
4. Name different types of vegetation found in India and describe the vegetation of high altitudes. 
Answer:
Vegetation in high altitudes
5. Quite a few species of plants and animals are endangered in India. Why? 
Answer:
6. Why has India a rich heritage of flora and fauna?
Answer:
Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Summary
Our country India is one of the 12 mega biodiversity countries of the world. With about 47,000 plant species India occupies the tenth place in the world and fourth in Asia in plant diversity. The diverse wildlife and natural vegetation make India one of the richest countries in terms of flora and flora.
Students will study the climatic conditions of the different parts of the country. The term flora is used to denote plants of a particular region or period. Similarly, the species of animals are referred to as fauna. Other important features of the natural vegetation in the country are given below:
1. Relief: Land and Soil
2. Climate
3. Types of Vegetation
India has approximately 90,000 animal species. The country has about 2,000 species of birds. They constitute 13% of the world’s total. There are 2,546 species of fish, which account for nearly 12% of the world’s stock. It also shares between 5 and 8 per cent of the world’s amphibians, reptiles and mammals.
Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Social Science is given in the linked page.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5What are the types of questions that students can answer by referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5?Students can answer both intext and exercise questions by referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5. Learning the answers to both the types of questions will help students attain a strong grip over all the topics and improve conceptual knowledge. Students can download the NCERT Solutions available in PDF for free to kickstart their CBSE Term II exam preparations at any time. All the answers are carefully written by individual subject experts at BYJU’S having vast experience teaching the respective subject.What are the merits of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5 from BYJU’S?The merits of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5 from BYJU’S are –
1. Students will acquire a solid foundation of fundamental concepts of the subject that are crucial from the examination perspective.
2. All the solutions are written in a simple and understandable language by subject experts to aid students to grasp the concepts with ease.
3. The solutions created are in accordance with the latest CBSE syllabus, guidelines and marking schemes.
4. By referring to these solutions regularly, students will be able to improve their presentation and time management skills which are vital for exams.List out are the key topics discussed in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography.The key topics discussed in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography are –
1. Relief: Land and Soil
2. Climate
a) Temperature
b) Photoperiod
c) Precipitation
3. Types of Vegetation
a) Tropical Evergreen Forests
b) Tropical Deciduous Forests
c)Tropical Thorn Forests and Scrubs
d) Montane Forests
e) Mangrove Forests
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5
What are the types of questions that students can answer by referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5?
What are the merits of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography Chapter 5 from BYJU’S?
List out are the key topics discussed in Chapter 5 of NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Geography.
