Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. What are the main activities of the people of village of
Palampur?
Ans. Farming is the main activity, whereas several other activities such as
small scale manufacturing, dairy, transport, etc. are carried out on a limited
scale.
Q.2. What type of sources are needed by these production
activities?
Ans. Natural resources, man-made items, human effort and money, etc., are
the sources needed by production activities.
Q.3. What kind of transportation is used for connecting Palampur to
these neighbouring villages and towns?
Ans. Bullock carts, tongas, wooden carts, motorcycles, jeeps, tractors and
trucks.
Q.4. How many families live in Palampur?
Ans. About 450 families belonging to several different castes live in
Palampur.
Q.5. What was the benefit of electricity in Palampur?
Ans. Most of the houses have electric connections. Electricity powers all the
tubewells in the fields and is also used in various types of small businesses.
Q.6. What is the first and foremost requirement for the production
of goods and services?
Ans. The foremost requirement is land and other natural resources such as
water, forests, minerals, etc.
Q.7. What is called ‘Working Capital?
Ans. Production requires a variety of raw materials and some money during
production to make payments and buy other necessary items. These are
included in the ‘Working Capital’.
Q.8. What does ‘Human Capital’ mean?

Ans. We need knowledge and enterprise to be able to put together land,
labour and physical capital and produce an output either to use yourself or to
sell in the market. This is called ‘Human Capital.’
Q.9. Which are the four main factors of production?
Ans. Land, labour, physical capital and human capital.
Q.10. What was the main reason behind the growth of three
different crops in a year in Palampur?
Ans. The main reason was the well-developed system of irrigation.
Q.11. What does ‘multiple cropping’ mean?
Ans. To grow more than one crop on a piece of land during the year is known
as multiple cropping.
Q.12. What is the benefit of multiple cropping?
Ans. It is the most common way of increasing production on a given piece of
land.
Q.13. How did Green Revolution benefit the Indian farmer?
Ans. The Green Revolution in late 1960s introduced the Indian farmer to high
yielding variety of seeds to produce much greater amount of grain on a
single plant.
Q.14. How was land resource affected by modern farming methods?
Ans. Land being a natural resource, it is necessary to be very careful in its
use. Scientific reports indicate that the modern farming methods have
overused the natural resource base.
Q.15. How do farm labourers get wages in Palampur?
Ans. Wages can be in cash or kind (crop). Sometimes labourers get meals
also. Wages vary widely from crop to crop, from one farm activity to another.
Q.16. How small farmers manage the capital needed for farming?
Ans. Small farmers have to borrow money to arrange for the capital.
Q.17. What is the basic difference between two factors of
production–land and capital?
Ans. Land is a natural resource whereas money is man-made. It is possible
to increase capital, whereas land is fixed.
Q.18. Name the non-farm activities of Palampur?

Ans. Dairy farming, small scale manufacturing, trade, shopkeeping and
providing transport services.
Q.19. How is dairy farming practiced in Palampur?
Ans. Many families sell the milk of their buffaloes, in nearby village Raiganj.
Traders of Shahpur town have set up collection cum chilling centres at
Raiganj from where the milk is transported to far away towns and cities.
Q.20. What kind of manufacturing units are set up in Palampur?
Ans. Manufacturing in Palampur involves very simple production methods
and are done on a small scale. They are carried out mostly at home or in the
fields with the help of family labou

