NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 2
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 2 “From Hunting – Gathering to Growing Food” contains the answers for the exercise questions. This chapter begins with a doubt that arises in the mind of Tushar while travelling from Delhi to Chennai. This chapter will systematically help in solving his query by making him understand how people moved from one place to the other, the reason behind their movement and the beginning of farming and herding.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF from the link given below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (Our Pasts- I) Chapter 2 From Hunting – Gathering to Growing Food:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science History Chapter 2- From Hunting – Gathering to Growing Food”

The solutions for Chapter 2, From Hunting – Gathering to Growing Food are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Exercise Questions Page No 22
Let’s Recall
 1. Complete the sentences
 (a) Hunter-gatherers chose to live in caves and rock shelters because – they found
protection from rains, winds and sunlight.
 (b) Grasslands developed around —-12,000 years— ago
 
2. Why do people who grow crops have to stay in the same place for a long time?
Solution 2:
When they plant a seed, it takes some time to grow. Depending on the type of seeds used, the time taken would vary from days, weeks, months and years. It means they had to stay in the same place to take care of the plants by watering, weeding, driving away animals and birds – till the grain ripened. Once ripened, they had to think of ways to store it. Hence, they had to stay in the same place for a long time.
3. Why do archaeologists think that many people who lived in Mehrgarh were hunters to start with and that herding became more important later?
Solution 3:
Archaeologists found the bones of many animals such as deer in the earlier levels. Hence, they could conclude that they were hunters to start with. Herding became important because they found bones of sheep and goat in the later levels.
4. Why did the hunter-gatherers travel from place to place? In what ways are these similar to/different from the reasons for which we travel today?
 Solution 4:
There are 4 reasons
5. List three ways in which hunter-gatherers used fire (see page 15). Would you use fire for any of these purposes today?
 Solution 5:
It was primarily used for 3 purposes.
Nowadays, we use fire for:
6. List 3 ways in which the lives of farmers and herders would have been different from that of hunter-gatherers.
 Solution 6:
From Hunting – Gathering to Growing Food Summary
The NCERT Class 6 History Our Pasts-I Chapter 2 talks about the following topics:
History – Our Pasts-I is an important book for Class 6 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 2List 3 ways in which the lives of farmers and herders would have been different from that of hunter-gatherers as discussed in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?1. Farmers and herders would stay in one location; whereas hunter-gatherers would have to move from place to place, following the movement of animals.
2. Farmers and herders would stay in huts or houses, whereas hunter-gatherers would stay in caves.
3. For farmers and herders, the food source would be crops and domesticated animals like sheep, goat; whereas hunters would rely on wild animals as a source of food.What are the benefits of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 2?Every student has to take up exams as they are the basis of assessing how knowledgeable and informational a student is. The NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 2 provides precise and detailed answers to the textbook questions. Students can also improve their problem solving and time management skills by regularly using these resources while preparing for exams. All the fundamentals are explained in a simple and comprehensive manner to aid students to ace their annual exam.What are the main topics covered in the Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The main topics that are covered in the Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History are –
1. Why people moved from one location to the another?
2. The beginning of farming and herding
3. Details on Mehrgarh
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 2
List 3 ways in which the lives of farmers and herders would have been different from that of hunter-gatherers as discussed in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
What are the benefits of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 2?
What are the main topics covered in the Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
