NCERT Book Solutions Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 8
Iron was essential for the growth of villages, cities and civilizations. Meanwhile, villages were an important part of large kingdoms. Kings extracted revenue from the villagers. Explore more about Vital Villages and Thriving Towns from Chapter 8 of CBSE Class 6 History. We also provide here the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 “Vital Villages, Thriving Towns” covering the solutions to the exercises given at the end of the Chapter in the book “History – Our Pasts – I”. These NCERT Solutions will be useful for school exams as they are sourced from the NCERT textbooks.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History (History – Our Pasts-I) Chapter 8 Vital Villages, Thriving Towns:- Download PDF Here
NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 – Vital Villages, Thriving Towns
The Solutions for Chapter 8, Vital Villages, Thriving Towns are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 6 for other subjects.
Q.1 Fill in the blanks:
Solution:
(a) Vellalar
(b) Slaves and workers.
(c) Uzhavar
(d) Smaller
Q.2 Describe the functions of the grambhojka. Why do you think he was powerful?
Solution: Gramabhojaka was the village headman, and at times happened to be the largest landowner too. He was a powerful person of the village who collected taxes from the villagers in the name of the king, functioned as a judge and enforced the law of the king in the village.
Q.3 List the crafts persons who would have been present in both villages and cities.
Solution: Craftsmen such as blacksmith, weavers, carpenters and potters were present in both villages and cities. They played a crucial role in providing goods and services that ensured the smooth functioning of any settlement.
Q.4 Choose the correct answer:
(a) Ring wells were used for:
1. Bathing
2. Washing clothes
3. Irrigation
4. drainage
(b) Punch marked coins were made of:
1. Silver
2. Gold
3. Tin
4. Ivory
 (c) Mathura was important:
 1. Rulers
 2. Craftspersons
 3. Religious centre
 4. Forested area
 (d) Shrenis were associations of:
 1. Rulers
 2. Craftspersons
 3. Farmers
 4. Herders
Solution: 
Archaeologists found rows of pots or ceramic rings arranged one on top of the other, known as ring wells. They were used as latrines in some cases, and also as drains and garbage dumps.
‘The punch-marked coins’ gets its name from the designs on the coins that were punched on them. They are coins made out of materials like copper and silver.
Mathura has been an important settlement for more than 2500 years, with several shrines within the fortified city. There were Buddhist monasteries, Jain shrines and it was an important centre of worship for Lord Krishna.
Shrenis was an association of craftsmen and merchants. These shrenis of craftspersons provided training, procured raw material and distributed the finished product.
Q.5 Which of the iron tools shown on page 79 (of the NCERT textbook) would have been important for agriculture? What would the other tools have been used for?
Solution: The iron tools on page 79 are tongs, axes and sickle as shown in the picture below, respectively. Of these, sickle would have been used for agriculture, axe would have been important for chopping trees and to gather firewood and tongs would have been used by a blacksmith for making tools from hot iron.

Q.6 Compare the drainage system in your locality with that of the cities mentioned in the lesson. What similarities and differences do you notice? 
Solution: The drainage system in our locality is the technologically advanced version of the drainage system used by past civilisations. In ancient times – mud bricks, ceramic and thatch were used to make them. The drawback was that the materials were not durable and would fall down with constant use. Today’s modern drainage systems are made of durable materials like concrete and metal. However, just like in the past, drainage is made by many rings which are stacked one over another. The rings are also made into a tube-like structure. These are the similarities we can notice today.
Q.7 If you have seen craftspersons at work, describe in a short paragraph what they do. (Hint: how do they get the raw materials, what kind of equipment do they use, how do they work, what happens to the finished product)
Solution: I have seen craftspeople like cobblers and carpenters in the cities and villages. Cobblers are a common sight and one could be found sitting at almost every corner in the city. They mend shoes by stitching the torn leather or pasting the flapping sole. In villages, they produce handmade shoes and slippers from leather to sell them locally or in urban markets for a good price.
Q.8 List the functions performed by men and women who live in your city or village. In what ways are these similar to those performed by people who lived in Mathura? In what ways are they different?
Solution: This project should be done under the supervision of your subject teacher.
Vital Villages, Thriving Towns Summary
The NCERT Class 6 Our Pasts – I Chapter 8 talks about the following topics:
History – Our Pasts-I is an important book for Class 6 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 8 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?The main topics that students will learn in Chapter 8 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History are:
1. Iron tools and agriculture
2. Other steps to increase production: irrigation
3. Who lived in the villages?
4. Coins
5. Cities with many functions
6. Crafts and craft persons
7. A closer look – ArikameduHow can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 PDF online?You can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 PDF from the links provided at BYJU’S website. Students need to register themselves with BYJU’S to download the solutions PDF for free. All the solutions are created by expert tutors having vast experience in their respective subjects following the latest CBSE guidelines. Further, all the solutions are written in a simple and understandable language to help students learn with ease and perform well in their Class 6 exams.Why should students opt for the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 for reference?Students should opt for the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 as it’s handy and easy to comprehend. Moreover, the solutions can be viewed online and downloaded in PDF for offline use by the students at no cost and without any time constraints. All the solutions are curated by subject experts at BYJU’S using simple language for the ease of learning. Neat explanations in paragraphs and usage of bullets in the solutions help students learn answer presentation skills that are vital for exams.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8
What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 8 of NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History?
How can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 PDF online?
Why should students opt for the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 6 History Chapter 8 for reference?
