NCERT Solutions Class 8 Social Science Geography Chapter 2 – Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Resources
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2 – Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Resources are given here for students to excel in their board exams. About 90% of the world population occupies only 30% of the land area. The remaining 70% of the land is either sparsely populated or uninhabited. You also see that the people who stay in two different parts of the world lead different lives, because of the differences in the quality of land, soil, water, natural vegetation, animals and the usage of technology.
The availability of such Resources is the main reason places differ from each other. These concepts related to Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Resources are discussed in NCERT Solutions to the exercises provided by subject experts at BYJU’S.
Students are advised to practice on a regular basis to achieve good scores in the exams. NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2- Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Resources contain solutions to the exercises given in the Geography book – Resources and Development.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography PDF below.
 NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography (Resources and Development) Chapter 2 Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation & Wildlife Resources
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2 – Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Resources
1. Answer the following questions.
(i) Which are the two main climatic factors responsible for soil formation?
Answer: Two main climatic factors responsible for soil formation are Temperature and Rainfall, wherein rainfall influences the rate of weathering and humus formation.
(ii) Write any two reasons for land degradation today.
Answer: The overuse of chemical fertilizers and deforestation are the two main reasons for land degradation. The growing population and their ever-growing demand has led to large scale destruction of forest cover and arable land and has created a fear of losing this natural resource.
(iii) Why is land considered an important resource?
Answer: Land is considered an important resource because it can be put to use for various purposes like agriculture, forestry, mining, building houses, roads and setting up of industries.
(iv) Name any two steps that the government has taken to conserve plants and animals.
Answer: Two major steps taken by Government to protect and conserve plants, animals and natural vegetation are:
(v) Suggest three ways to conserve water.
Answer: Three main ways to conserve water are:
a. Increasing forest cover and other vegetation to slow the surface runoff
b. Replenishing underground water through rainwater harvesting
c. Reducing the loss of water in irrigation and shifting to less water-intensive methods of agriculture
2. Tick the correct answer.
(i) Which one of the following is NOT a factor of soil formation?
(a) Time
(b) Soil texture
(c) Organic matter
Answer: b. Soil Texture
(ii) Which one of the following methods is most appropriate to check soil erosion on steep slopes?
(a) Shelterbelts
(b) Mulching
(c) Terrace cultivation
Answer: c Terrace cultivation
(iii) Which one of the following is NOT in favour of the conservation of nature?
(a) switch off the bulb when not in use
(b) close the tap immediately after using
(c) dispose poly packs after shopping
Answer: c Dispose poly packs after shopping
3. Match the following
Answer: 
4: State whether the given statement is true or false. If true, give the reasons.
(i). Ganga–Brahmaputra plain of India is an overpopulated region.
True: River valley and plains offer suitable land for agriculture. Hence, they are densely populated.
(ii) Water availability per person in India is declining.
True: Increasing population, increasing urbanization, the rising standards of living and the rising demands for food and cash crops are leading to shortages in the supply of freshwater. The shortages are either due to drying up of water sources or water pollution.
(iii) Rows of trees planted in the coastal areas to check the wind movement are called intercropping.
False: Rows of trees are planted to check the wind movement and protect soil cover. These are called as shelterbelts.
(iv). Human interference and changes of climate can maintain the ecosystem.
False:  Climate change and human interferences can cause the loss of natural habitats, and hence destroy the ecosystem.
Chapter 2 – Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Resources Summary
Land, soil and water come under abiotic resources and are the most important resources. Natural vegetation and wildlife resources come under biotic resources. Both Biotic and abiotic resources are exhaustible in nature, therefore a judicial use of these resources should be maintained for enhancing their longevity.
The land is among the most important natural resources. It covers about 30% of the total area of the earth’s surface. 90% of the world population occupies only 30% of the land area. The remaining 70% of the land is either sparsely populated or uninhabited.
The land is unevenly inhabited due to various factors like land and climate, water fertility of the soil, etc.
Generally, the sparsely populated or uninhabited areas are because of the rugged top soil.
You will also learn about the following topics:
Resources and Development is an important book for Class 8 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the solutions for full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Social Science is provided here. Students can refer and easily download the solutions pdf for free from the links given.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2Suggest some ways to conserve water as discussed in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography?Some ways to conserve water as discussed in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography are:
1) Increasing forest cover and other vegetation to slow the surface runoff
2) Replenishing underground water through rainwater harvesting
3) Reducing the loss of water in irrigation and shifting to less water-intensive methods of agriculture
To learn other concepts present in this chapter, students are recommended to download the solutions available on BYJU’S.What are the benefits of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2?Every student has to take up exams as they are the basis of assessing how knowledgeable and informational a student is. The NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2 provides precise and detailed answers to the textbook questions. Students can also improve their problem solving and time management skills by regularly using these resources while preparing for exams. All the fundamentals are explained in a simple and comprehensive manner to aid students to ace their annual exam.What are the main topics covered in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography?The main topics that are covered in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography are –
1. Uses of Land
2. Conservation of Land Resources
3. Soil, soil formation, factors affecting soil formation, Degradation and conservation of soil
4. Water, Problem of water availability and conservation of water
5. Natural vegetation & wildlife, its distribution and conservation
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2
Suggest some ways to conserve water as discussed in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography?
What are the benefits of referring to the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography Chapter 2?
What are the main topics covered in Chapter 2 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Geography?
