NCERT Book Solutions For Class 10 Geography Contemporary India – II Chapter 1 Resources and Development – CBSE Term I Free PDF Download
NCERT Solutions Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 – Resources and Development are an important resource for students to prepare for CBSE Term I exams. By going through these solutions, students will get to know the answer writing style, which will help them in fetching more marks in the exam. They will also understand how to express their answers by covering all the important details. These NCERT Class 10 Solutions are created by subject experts and help students to prepare effectively for their Social Science exam.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography (Contemporary India II) Chapter 1 – Resources and Development
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 – Resources and Development
The solutions for Chapter 1 – Resources and Development are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 10 for other subjects.
Exercise Page No 12
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following type of resource is iron ore? 
(a) Renewable 
(b) Biotic 
(c) Flow
(d) Non-renewable
Answer:
Non-renewable
(ii) Under which of the following type of resource tidal energy cannot be put? 
(a) Replenishable 
(b) Human-made 
(c) Abiotic 
(d) Non-recyclable
Answer: 
Replenishable
(iii) Which one of the following is the main cause of land degradation in Punjab? 
(a) Intensive cultivation 
(b) Deforestation 
(c) Over irrigation 
(d) Overgrazing
Answer:
Over irrigation
(iv) In which one of the following states is terrace cultivation practised? 
(a) Punjab 
(b) Plains of Uttar Pradesh 
(c) Haryana 
(d) Uttarakhand
Answer:
Uttarakhand
(v) In which of the following states black soil is predominantly found? 
(a) Jammu and Kashmir 
(b) Maharashtra 
(c) Rajasthan 
(d) Jharkhand
Answer:
Maharashtra
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Name three states having black soil and the crop which is mainly grown in it. 
Answer:
3 states are
The crop grown is cotton.
(ii) What type of soil is found in the river deltas of the eastern coast? Give three main features of this type of soil. 
Answer:
The type of soil found in river deltas is Alluvial Soil.
 (iii) What steps can be taken to control soil erosion in the hilly areas?
Answer:
The main techniques that can be used are given below.
 (iv) What are the biotic and abiotic resources? Give some examples.
Answer:
Biotic resource:
Abiotic resource:
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. 
(i) Explain the land use pattern in India and why has the land under forest not increased much since 1960-61? 
Answer:
The use of land is determined both by physical factors such as topography, climate, soil types as well as human factors such as population density, technological capability and culture and traditions etc. The pattern of the net sown area varies greatly from one state to another. It is over 80 per cent of the total area in Punjab and Haryana and less than 10 per cent in Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur and Andaman Nicobar Islands. Forest area in the country is far lower than the desired 33 per cent of geographical area, as it was outlined in the National Forest Policy (1952). It was considered essential for the maintenance of the ecological balance. A part of the land is termed as wasteland and land put to other non-agricultural uses. Wasteland includes rocky, arid and desert areas and land put to other non-agricultural uses includes settlements, roads, railways, industry etc. Continuous use of land over a long period of time without taking appropriate measures to conserve and manage has resulted in land degradation.
(ii) How has technical and economic development led to more consumption of resources?
Answer:
There are various reasons for this.
Resources and Development Summary
The students will get to know about the following topics:
‘Contemporary India-II’ is an important book for Class 10 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography?The main topics that students will learn in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography are:
Types of resources
Development of Resources
Rio-de-Janeiro Earth Summit
Agenda 21
Resource Planning
Conservation of Resources
Land Utilisation
Land use pattern in India
Classification of soils
Soil erosion and conservationHow can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 PDF online?You can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 PDF from the links provided at BYJU’S website. Students only need to register themselves with BYJU’S to download the solutions PDF for free. All the solutions are created by expert tutors having vast experience in their respective subject following the latest CBSE guidelines. Students wishing to obtain a better idea of answering the textbook questions can refer to the solutions PDF. Further, all the solutions are written in a simple and understandable language to help students learn with ease and perform well in their Class 10 CBSE Term I exams.Why should students opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 for reference?Students should opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 as it’s handy and easy to comprehend. Moreover, the solutions can be viewed online and downloaded in PDF for offline use by the students at no cost and without any time constraints. All the solutions are curated by subject experts at BYJU’S using simple language for the ease of learning. Neat explanations in paragraphs and using bulletins in the solutions help students learn answer presentation skills vital for exams.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1
What are the main topics that students will learn in Chapter 1 of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography?
How can I download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 PDF online?
Why should students opt the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 1 for reference?
