NCERT Book Solutions For Class 10 Geography Contemporary India – II Chapter 6 Manufacturing Industries – CBSE Term II Free PDF Download
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 discusses about the industries which manufacture various items in a simple and understandable manner. Students who are finding it difficult to get the answers to the exercise questions of Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 can refer to the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 – Manufacturing Industries. These solutions contain the answers to all the questions in a descriptive way. Answers are provided in a simple language and in an expressive way so that students can easily understand it. Referring to these answers will help students in scoring high marks in the CBSE Term II Social Science exam.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography (Contemporary India II) Chapter 6 – Manufacturing Industries 
NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 – Manufacturing Industries
The solutions for Chapter 6 – Manufacturing Industries are given below. Students can also check the NCERT Solutions Class 10 of other subjects.
 Page No. – 79
Exercises
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following industries uses limestone as a raw material.
a) Aluminium (b) Cement (c ) Sugar (d) Jute
Solution: (b) Cement
(ii) Which one of the following agencies markets steel for the public sector plants?
a) HAIL (b) SAIL (c ) TATA Steel (d) MNCC
Solution: (b) SAIL
(iii) Which one of the following industries uses bauxite as a raw material?
a) Aluminium (b) Cement (c ) Jute (d) Steel
Solution: (a) Aluminium
(iv) Which one of the following industries manufactures telephones, computer, etc?
a) Steel (b) Electronic (c ) Aluminium (d) Information Technology
Solution: (b) Electronic
2. Answer the following briefly in not more than 30 words.
(i) What is manufacturing?
Solution:
Manufacturing is the production of goods in large quantities after processing from raw materials to more valuable products. For e.g.,- paper is manufactured from wood, sugar from sugarcane, iron and steel from iron ore and aluminium from bauxite.
(ii) Name any three physical factors for the location of the industry.
Solution:
Three physical factors for the location of the industry are:
For e.g., – Jute textile industry is concentrated in West Bengal as the jute producing areas lie in the Hugli basin and there is cheap water transport for transportation and for processing of jute.
(iii) Name any three human factors for the location of an industry
Solution:
Three human factors for the location of an industry are:
For e.g., – Jute textile industry in West Bengal gets cheap labour from the adjoining states, and Kolkata is a large urban centre for banking, insurance and port facilities.
(iv) What are the basic industries? Give an example.
Solution:
Basic or key industries are the industries which supply their product or raw materials to manufacture other goods.
Example – Iron and steel industries provide iron and steel to other industries as the raw material.
(v) Name the important raw materials used in the manufacturing of cement?
Solution:
Important raw materials used in the manufacture of cement are:
3. Write the answers to the following questions in 120 words.
(i) How are integrated steel plants different from mini steel plants? What problems does the industry face? What recent developments have led to a rise in the production capacity?
Solution:
Integrated steel plants are large and handle everything in one complex – from putting together raw material to steel making, rolling and shaping.
Mini steel plants are smaller, have electric furnaces, use steel scrap and sponge iron. They have re-rollers that use steel ingots as well. They produce mild and alloy steel of given specifications.
The challenges faced by the steel industry are:
Recent developments such as liberalisation and foreign direct investment (FDI) have given a boost to the industry with the efforts of private entrepreneurs.
(ii) How do industries pollute the environment?
Solution:
Industries are responsible for four types of pollution:
Air pollution is caused by the presence of a high proportion of undesirable gases, such as sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide and airborne particulate matter.
Water pollution is caused by organic and inorganic industrial wastes, and effluents discharged into water bodies. Paper, refineries and tanneries are the main culprits.
Soil and water pollution are closely related. Dumping of waste makes the soil useless for agricultural activities. The pollutants then reach the groundwater through the soil and contaminate it.
Noise pollution is caused by industrial machinery and construction activities.
(iii) Discuss the steps to be taken to minimise environmental degradation by industry.
Solution:
The steps that can be taken to minimise environmental degradation by industries are:
Manufacturing Industries Summary
The students will get to know about the following topics:
5. Industrial Pollution and Environmental Degradation
6. Control of Environmental Degradation
‘Contemporary India-II’ is an important book for Class 10 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6How many questions are present in NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6?The second chapter of NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Sectors of the Economy has 3 main questions and more sub questions in total. Among these, the first question is of the type MCQ containing 4 sub-questions and the remaining are short and long answers type questions.Where can I find the correct NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 online?The NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 can be found by students on BYJU’S website. These NCERT Solutions are one among the top-rated study materials available online for free. Students can undoubtedly rely upon these for their CBSE Term II exam preparations. To refer the solutions offline, the PDFs containing solutions are made available to students for free download and can be accessed at any time. All the solutions have been curated by subject matter experts at BYJU’S carefully based on the latest syllabus of the CBSE board.Are NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 effective for the CBSE Term II exam preparation?The NCERT Solutions aid students to strengthen their foundation in the fundamental topics of Geography. The answers to behind text questions are designed by highly knowledgeable experts in the subject at BYJU’S having vast experience. These solutions will definitely improve the focus among students and help them score well in the CBSE Term II exams.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6
How many questions are present in NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6?
Where can I find the correct NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 online?
Are NCERT Solutions for Class 10 Geography Chapter 6 effective for the CBSE Term II exam preparation?
