Short Answer Questions
Q.1. India is an active participant in environmental programmes. Explain with an example. Ans. The Indian government is already participating in global efforts through a number of programmes. For example, India’s National Auto-fuel policy mandates cleaner fuel for vehicles. The Energy Conservation Act, passed in 2001, Outline initiative to improve energy efficiency. Similarly, the Electricity Act (2003) encourage the use of renewableenergy. Recent trends in importing natural gas and encouraging the adoption of clean coal technologies show that India has been exercising real efforts. The government is also keen to launch a National Mission on Biodiesel, using about 11 million hectares of land to produce biodiesel, by 2011-12. And India has one of the largest renewableenergy programmes in the world. It is a good example for other countries. Q.2. What do you mean by ‘Global Commons’? Give any two suggestions for its safety. [CBSE Delhi 2012] Or What is meant by ‘Commons’? Explain your answer with an example. [NCERT, CBSE Delhi 2014] Or Explain the meaning of ‘Global Commons’ and write any four examples of Global Commons. [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. Commons are those resources which are not owned by anyone but rather shared by a community. There are some areas or regions of the world which are located outside the sovereign jurisdiction of any one state, and therefore require common governance by international community. These are known as ‘global commons’. They include theearth’s atmosphere, Antarctica, the ocean floor, and outer space. Various suggestions are given by various people for its safety. The two important suggestions are as follows: 1. A joint fund should be formalised in which every country should contribute a part of their national income. The fund should be utilized by international judges.
2. Similar and cooperative behaviour towards Global Common should be there. Responsibilities are common but roles are different. Thus, role should be played by all. Q.3. What are the reasons for growing concerns about the environment? [CBSE Sample Paper 2015] Ans. Environment concern is a very serious issue because of the following facts: (i) Cultivable area throughout the world is decreasing and losing in fertility. (ii) Water bodies getting polluted due to pollution. (iii) Rapid decline in the total amount of ozone in the earth’s stratosphere. (iv) Global coastal pollution has increased due to land based activities. Q.4. Why is mineral industry criticised and opposed in different parts of the world? Ans. Following are the reasons why mineral industry is being criticised and opposed in different parts of world: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
The mineral industry’s extraction of earth. Its use of chemicals. Its pollution of waterways and land. Its clearance of native vegetation. Its displacement of communities.
One example that can be cited is of the Philippines, where a vast network of groups and organisations campaigned against the Western Mining Corporation (WMC), an Australia-based multinational company. Q.5. Explain the role of Environment Movements to meet the challenge of Environmental Degradation. [CBSE Delhi 2016] Ans. Environmental movements meet the challenge of environmental degradation by: (i) Social movements such as the Chipko movement resist the degradation of their surrounding environment and become a popular movement. (ii) They ensure information campaigns in school, colleges and through popular media to highlight issues of environmental degradation. (iii) They pressurise governments to effectively combat climate change such as in Paris negotiations. (iv) These movements began ground campaigns such as cleaning beaches, etc. and thereby involve public participation.
Q.6. Mention India’s efforts to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. Ans. India has exercised many efforts towards environment’s cleanliness and safety: 1. It has National Auto fuel Policy which mandates cleaner fuels for vehicles. 2. To improve energy efficiency, the Energy Conservation Act had been passed in 2001. 3. The Electricity Act of 2003 encourages the use of renewable energy. 4. It is importing natural gas and encouraging the adoption of clean coal technologies. 5. The government launched a National Mission on Biodiesel to produce biodiesel. 6. It has one of the largest renewable energy programmes in the world. Q.7. “The Indian Government is already participating in global efforts through a number of programmes related to environmental issues.” Give any four examples to support the statement. [CBSE Delhi 2016] Or Explain India’s stand on environmental issues. [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. India has one of the lowest per person carbon output in the world. India is participating in global efforts related to environmental issues through: (i) India has committed itself to the obligations of the Kyoto Protocol and Paris Climate negotiations and has committed to reduce its carbon footprints. (ii) India has worked towards utilizing renewable energy through its National Solar mission, and other schemes. It is reducing its dependency on coal and other fossil fuels. (iii) India has made efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, such as upgrading Euro IV emissions targets for motor vehicles, restrictions on polluting industries, etc. (iv) India has made efforts towards utilizing energy efficient technology and ensured safeguards in the form of energy efficient markings on appliances, etc. (v) India has invested in increasing its forest coverage area.
