HOTS (Higher Order Thinking Skills)
Q.1. Why was ‘Operation Desert Storm’ fought against Iraq? [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. To liberate Kuwait from Iraqi control in 1990. Q.2. What does the term ‘hegemony’ convey? Ans. ‘Hegemony’ conveys dominance or leadership of any one class or state or country. Q.3. First Gulf War proved US hegemony. How? Ans. First Gulf War proved US hegemony in World affairs. The highly publicised use of so-called ‘smart bombs’ by the US led some observers to call this a ‘computer war’. Widespread television coverage also made it as ‘video game war’, with viewers around the world watching the destruction of Iraqi forces live on TV in the comfort of their living rooms. This proved America’s better technological and military capability as compared to other nations. First Gulf war was the performance of UN military under the dominance of US. The US made a profit from the war. The money was received by US from countries like Germany, Japan and Saudi Arabia. Thus, money was saved too. Q.4. Give an example each of the three kinds of hegemony that are dealt with in the chapter. Do not cite examples that are in the chapter. [NCERT] Ans. Hegemony can be classified in the following three kinds: 1. Hegemony – As hard power 2. Hegemony – As structural power 3. Hegemony – As soft power. Examples: As hard power: America has paralysed many citizens of Iraq.As Structural power: America is leading due to Pepsi Co. and Coca-Cola drinks. As Soft power: America is influencing every youth and changing dressing sense is its live example. Q.5. “If big and resourceful states cannot resist the US hegemony, it is unrealistic to expect much smaller and weaker non-state actors to offer any resistance .” Examine this proposition and give your opinion. [NCERT]
Ans. In our views, “If big and resourceful states cannot resist the US hegemony, it is unrealistic to expect much smaller and weaker non-state actors to offer any resistance” is absolutely true. US is the world’s powerful and rich country. No other power today can match the US military capabilities. A military coalition against the US is even less likely given the differences that exist among big countries like China, India and Russia that have the potential to challenge US hegemony. If these big countries are unable to challenge US hegemony, then smaller countries whose number is more than even 160 cannot challenge US hegemony. Unitywon’t be possible as they would be having differences among them. Secondly, they would rather find supporting America more beneficial than revolting against it. Third, these smaller countries lack in military capabilities. Facing US military will be much difficult even if they all got unified. Q.6. How does hegemony keep on changing? Elaborate by citing historical examples. Ans. Politics is about power and hegemony revolves around power. This power is in the form of military domination, economic power, political clout and cultural superiority. Different countries are particular about power balance in international political system. They do not let any country become such a powerful nation that it emerges as a dangerfor other countries. Historically, there have been only two instances so far where a country has succeeded at international front like US and has acquired its dominance. History also tells us that hegemony does not always resist. The balance of power often decreases the internal power of the hegemony. In 1660, in the period of Lui-XIV, France was undefeatable,but by 1713, English, Hersvoarg, Russia stopped Challenging France. In 1860, under the rule of victoria, British state seemed safe but by 1910, it seemed clear that Germany, Japan and America had turned tables against Britain’s power. The same can happen in today’s world as well. A superpower or coalition of powerful countries can emerge after 20 years. Q.7. “Resistance is the only option available to overcome the hegemony”. Justify the statement by comparing it to other antihegemony strategies. [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. Bandwagon Strategy: •
•
•
The best way to resist hegemony is to work with rather than against the hegemony. So, instead of engaging in activities opposed to hegemonic power, it may be to extract benefits by operating within the hegemonic system. Hide – Another strategy implies staying away from the dominant power as fas as possible. All the big powers like China, Russia, the European Union are seeking to stay below the radar but this cannot go on for a long time. However, some people believe that resistance to the US hegemony is the only solution but not from states who are unable to face the hegemony.
•
• •
Therefore, challenges to the US hegemony will emerge in the economic and cultural realms and will come from a contribution of Non-Governmental organization Social movements and public opinion. Resistance may be from the sections of media and intellectuals, artists, and writers. All these together can be successful in resisting the US hegemony.
Q.8. Which are the three policies on which there has been a continuous debate within India regarding Indo-US relationships? Ans. Within India, the debate seems to be around three possible strategies: (i) Military power: These Indian analysts who see international politics largely in terms of military power are fearful of the growing closeness between India and the US. They would prefer that India maintains its aloofness from Washington and focuses upon increasing its own comprehensive national power. (ii) Historic Opportunity: Other analysts see the growing convergence of interests between the US and India as a historic opportunity for India. They would advocate a strategy that would allow India to take advantage of US hegemony and the mutual convergences to establish the best possible options for itself. It is a futile strategy that will only hunt India in the long run. (iii) Establishing a Coalition: A third group of analysts would advocate that India should take the lead in establishing a coalition of countries from the developing world. Over time, this coalition would become more powerful and may succeed in weaning the hegemon away from its dominating ways. Q.9. How can Indo-US relationship be understood ? Ans. There are two new factors that have emerged in Indo-US relations in recent years. These factors relate to the technological dimension and the role of Indian-American diaspora. These two factors are interrelated. These can be understood by following facts: • • • •
The US absorbs about 65 per cent of India’s total exports in the software sector. 35 per cent of the technical staff of Boeing is estimated to be of Indian origin. 3,00,000 Indians work in Silicon Valley. 15 per cent of all high-tech start-ups are by Indian-Americans.
Q.10. How far it is appropriate to say that after 1990, India’s foreign policy has shown an inclination towards America? Explain [CBSE Delhi 2012] Ans. The above statement is absolutely correct. After the disintegration of the Second World, India should modify its foreign policy and should focus more on its friendship with USA instead of Russia. After the disintegration of Soviet Union, ‘Unipolar’ system
emerged, where America was the sole superpower. The war that existed between capitalist system and communist system for years came to an end. Superiority of capitalist economy was proved in comparison to communist economy. That’s why, India should try to focus on itsfriendship with America along with some modifications in its foreign policies. India’s non-alignment policy can’t be continued as there’s only a single superpower in the world. When India struggled for independence, it was USA only which pressurised Britain’s government to grant independence to India. When nonalignment policy of India came into existence, Indo-US relations became bitter. Their relations again became cordial after the end of the Cold War. India and US came closer during Clinton’s visit to India in March 2000 and Atal Bihari Vajpayi’s visit to America in September 2000. America helped Pakistan during Kargil War in November 1998. Terrorist attacks in America on11 September, 2001 gave a new direction to Indo-US relations. America wants its own benefits by establishing trade relations with India. India being considerate about its benefits, should maintain trade relations with US. It should use world’s superpower for its benefits. Q.11. Mention three ways in which US dominance since the Cold War is different from its position as a superpower during the Cold War. [NCERT] Ans. In 1991, the sudden collapse of the Soviet Union marked the ending of the Cold War. Hegemony of a sole superpower emerged in place of two superpowers. Beginning of US hegemony was not marked in 1991, rather it started in 1945, after the end of the Second World War. But the process of showing hegemony in realistic manner and strength started in 1991. Following are the three points that show the ways in which US dominance since the Cold War is different from its position as a superpower during the Cold War. (i) Operation Desert Storm: In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait, rapidly occupying and subsequently annexing it. After a series of diplomatic attempts failing at convincing Iraq to quit its aggression, the United Nations mandated the liberation of Kuwait by force. This was termed as ‘New World Order’. A massive coalition force of 6,60,000 troops from 34 countries fought against Iraq. However, the UN operation was overwhelmingly American, as nearly 75 per cent of the coalition forces were from US and the military general was also American. This war revealed the vast technological gap that had opened up between the US military capability and that of other states. It was made clear that no country can match US and thus, US hegemony was established in the world. (ii) Action Against Yugoslavia: America took military actions against Yugoslavia during Clinton’s tenure in 1999. It was an important episode occurred in 1999, in response to Yugoslavian action against the predominantly Albanian population in the province of Kosovo. The air forces of the NATO countries, led by the US, bombarded
targets around Yugoslavia for well over two months, forcing the downfall of the governmentof Slobodan Milusevic and stationing of a NATO force in Kosovo. (iii) Operation Iraqi Freedom: On 19 March 2003, the US launched its invasion of Iraq under the code name ‘Operation Iraqi Freedom’. The Ostensible purpose of the invasion was to prevent Iraq from developing weapons of mass destruction (WMD). But the real objective was to control Iraqi oil fields by the US. 50,000 Iraqi Civilians were killed since the US led invasion. Q.12. “India should not give up its policy of non-alignment and align with the United States.” Give arguments in support or against this statement. [CBSE Sample Paper 2015] Ans. India should not give up its policy of non-alignment and align with the US because: In favour: •
•
•
Its closeness with US will affect its relations with other smaller and bigger powers around its region and in the world due to various reasons. India should instead lead a coalition of countries from the developing world. India should focus on its own national interest and development, on removal of its internal and external challenges and work towards making itself safe, secure and prosperous without depending on any external power. Hegemony is a temporary entity; it does not last forever. Balance of power politics over time reduces the relative power of the hegemony. India has to decide and adopt a mix of foreign policy strategies to deal with the US.
Against: • • • •
NAM is not relevant in post-cold war period anymore. After the collapse of USSR, India suddenly became friendless and therefore needs to tilt towards US now, the only superpower left. Convergence of interests between US and India – a historic opportunity for India. It should take advantage of US hegemony because opposing the US or not aligning with US would only hurt India in the long run.
Q.13. Will US hegemony in international politics always be maintained? Explain your answer. Ans. US hegemony and its powers in unipolar system have become a major concern in the world. Everyone thinks for how long will this US hegemony continue? The answer seems to be impossible as there are only a few things that can control military power/capability of any country. There is no world government like the government of the country. International politics is ‘politics without government’. There are some rules and norms called the laws of war that restrict the actions of belligerents in a war, but that do not prohibit war. We must recognise that no single power is anywhere near
balancing the US military. A military coalition against the US is even less likely given the differences that exist among big countries like China, India and Russia that have the potential to challenge US hegemony. Some people argue that it is strategically more prudent to take advantage of the opportunities that hegemony creates. For instance, raising economic growth rates require increased trade, technology transfers and investment, which are best acquired by working with rather than against hegemon. Thus, it is suggested that instead of engaging in activities opposed to the hegemonic operating within the hegemonic power,it may be advisable to extract benefits by system. This is called the ‘bandwagon’ strategy. Countries like China, Russia, the European Union, are seeking to stay below the radar and not overly and unduly antagonise US. However, this would not seem to be viable for the big second-rank powers for very long. It is hard to imagine a country being able to hide from US for any substantial length of time.
