Very-Very Short Answer
Q.1. Complete the sentence: India, China and other developing countries were exempted from the requirements of the _________ _________ . Ans. Kyoto Protocol. Q.2. State True or False: West Asia, Specifically the Gulf region, accounts for about 30% of global oil production. Ans. True. Q.3. Correct and rewrite the statement: Resource politics is all about who gets what, when, where and how. Ans. Resource Geopolitics is all about who gets what, when, where and how. Q.4. Match the following: ‘A’ i. ii. iii. iv.
G-8 meeting Antarctica Ocean floor, outer space, earth’s atmosphere The Rio Summit War over Yamruk River
‘B’ a. b. c. d.
Global Commons June 2005 Israel, Syria, Jordon Agenda 21
Ans. (i) – (b), (ii) – (a), (iii) – (d), (iv) – (c). Q.5. When did India signed Kyoto Protocol? Ans. In the year 2002. Q.6. Write full form of UNFCCC. Ans. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Q.7. Write full form of UNEP. Ans. United Nations Environment Programme.
Q.8. Write full name of CFC. Ans. Chloro Fluoro Carbon. Q.9. Write full name of WWF. Ans. World Wildlife Fund. Q.10. How many countries took part in the ‘Earth summit’? Ans. 170 countries. Q.11. Against which company of Philippines was campaign held? Ans. Western Mining Corporation. Q.12. When were environment related issues taken up seriously? Ans. From the decade 1960. Q.13. For what the word ‘Indigenous people’ in India used for? Ans. For Scheduled Tribes. Q.14. What is the contribution of ‘indigenous people’ to the total population of country? Ans. 8 per cent. Q.15. What has encompassed issues of environment and national resources? Ans. Issues of environment and national resources have been included to world politics. Q.16. Which book was published by ‘The Club of Rome’? Ans. ‘The Club of Rome’ published a book entitled ‘Limits to Growth’. Q.17. What is ‘The Club of Rome’? Ans. ‘The Club of Rome’ is a global think tank that deals with a variety of international issues including environment. Q.18. What is Earth Summit? Ans. United Nations Conference on Environment and Development held in June 1992 was called as ‘Earth Summit’. Q.19. Who all took part in Earth Summit? Ans. The Earth Summit was attended by 170 states, thousands of NGOs and many multinational corporations. Q.20. How do critics view ‘Agenda-21’?
Ans. Some critics have pointed out that Agenda 21 was biased towards economic growth rather than ensuring ecological conservation. Q.21. What was told in the report titled ‘Our Common Future’? Ans. This report had warned that traditional patterns of economic growth would not be sustainable in the long term. Q.22. What is ‘Global Commons’? Ans. There are some areas or regions of the world which are located outside the sovereign jurisdiction of any one state, and therefore require common governance by international community. They are known as ‘global commons’. Q.23. Which agreements have been signed for the protection of environment? Ans. There have been many agreements for the protection of environment such as the 1959 Antarctic Treaty, the 1987 Montreal Protocol, and the 1991 Antarctic Environment Protocol. Q.24. What incident of mid-1980s revealed the dangers inherent in tackling global environmental problems? Ans. The discovery of the hole in the ozone layer above the Antarctica in the mid 1980s was an opener to the whole world to the dangers inherent in tackling global environmental problems. Q.25. What is Kyoto Protocol? [CBSE Sample Paper] Ans. The Kyoto Protocol is an international agreement linked to UN’s framework convention on climate change which commits its members by conferring them with emission reduction targets. Q.26. What is the Global Warming? Ans. World’s temperature rises due to the influence of Global Warming. Q.27. Which countries have been exempted from the requirement of the Kyoto Protocol? Ans. China, India and other developing countries were exempted from the requirement of the Kyoto Protocol. Q.28. When and where was world’s first anti-dam movement launched? Ans. The early 1980s saw the first anti-dam movement launched in the North, namely, the campaign to save the Franklin River and its surrounding forests in Australia.
Q.29. The Antarctic continental region extends over how many square kilometers? Ans. The Antarctic continental region extends over 14 millions square kilometers. Q.30. Which countries claimed Antarctica? Ans. Britain, Argentina, Chile, Norway, France, Australia and New Zealand. Q.31. Name the gases responsible for the Global Warming. Ans. Carbon dioxide, Methane and Hydro-fluoro carbons. Q.32. What is the main cause of climatic change and global warming? Ans. Industrialisation is the main cause for climatic change and Global warming. Q.33. Among which countries was struggle regarding water distribution observed? Ans. Between Israel, Syria and Jordan. Q.34. What is the per cent of indigenous people of the total population in India? Ans. Indigenous people are 8 per cent of the total population in India. Q.35. Give examples of Global Common. Ans. Examples of Global Common are earth’s atmosphere, Antarctica, the Ocean floor and outer space.
