Long Answer Questions
Q.1. What were the reasons of emergence of Cold War? Explain any two. Ans. Difference in Opinions: Britain and France were no longer superpowers after Second World War. Two new blocs, Soviet Union and America originated that led capitalism and communal ideology, Russia wanted to spread communism and Socialism whereas America wanted to stop that. After Second World War, Eastern Europe came under the influence of communism under the direction of Soviet Union. Communism was spread not only in Germany, Hungary, Romania, Yugoslavia, etc. but also in Northern Korea in Asia and up to China. This put America under fire. This led to difference in opinions between both the states to a large extent. This gave rise in the bitterness in relationship between both the countries to such an extent that both had suspected view points for each other. Distrust in their relationships led to the beginning of Cold War. Truman Policy: American President, Truman made a programme to help states of Western Europe to stop the influence of USSR. Truman felt that communism spreads only when the people are poor and victim. It can be stopped by providing financial help to the weaker section to make them prosper. In the year 1947, American StateSecretary, Marshal prepared a plan to provide million dollars financial assistance to Europe so that the losses done by war can be compensated. Had this not been done by America then all of these would have become a part of Soviet Union. The Western European countries were now capable to protect themselves from this. At that particular time in interference of Soviet helped these American countries who opposed communalism and determined to keep them integrated. Q.2. What do you mean by Cold War? Why superpowers do military alliance with small nations? [CBSE Delhi 2013] Or Why did superpowers do military alliance with small nations? Explain any three reasons. [NCERT, CBSE Delhi 2013] Ans. Cold war is referred to the competition, tension and a series of confrontations between countries but it does not convert into a war. After the end of Second World War, Soviet Union and America emerged as two superpowers. Both the superpowers were no less in terms of weapons and strength from each other. Tensions, confrontations and competitions always existed between the two but none of them tried to initiate a direct war. This state of confrontation and tension is termed as cold war. In
other words, existence of tension, possibility of war but no war being witnessed and small incidents of struggle between military alliances of two superpower is known as Cold War. The superpowers had military alliance with smaller states due to the following reasons: • • •
Superpowers had military alliance with smaller countries so that superpowers could launch their weapons and troops from these countries. Superpowers used to spy the enemy countries from smaller countries. Smaller countries used to pay for the soldiers that were a part of military alliance. Due to this, economic pressure on the superpowers decreased.
Q.3. Explain any six factors that helped in making Soviet Union as a superpower after the Second World War. [CBSE Delhi 2012] Ans. After the Second World War, following factors were responsible to make Soviet Union a superpower: Eastern Europeans were under control of Soviet Union: During the Second World War, east European countries were liberated from fascist forces by Soviet Union. Thus, after the end of the Second World War, all these east European countries came under the control of Soviet Union. System of countries that came under the influence of Soviet Union: After the end of the Second World War, the political, social and economic system of east European countries were moulded under the influence of Soviet Union. Leader of Socialist Countries: USSR emerged as the leader of socialist bloc. The groups of countries which were liberated from fascist forces were known as ‘Second World’. USSR was the new leader of this bloc. The ‘Warsaw Pact’, a military alliance held them together. Complex Communication Network: USSR had a complex network of information and communication. It was the leading country in the scientific field. It was successful in sending first space traveller or moon. It was a leading country in terms of production of nuclear weapons. Improvement in transport sector: Even the remotest areas of USSR were connected with capital Moscow with the improvement in efficiency of transport section, which led to the change in economic and cultural environment. Improvement in other fields such as Industries, Occupation and land system: After the Second World War, USSR improved in every field. There was noticeable improvement in its economy. Vast minerals and energy resources helped in its progress. It had a domestic consumer industry that produced everything from pins to cars. The Soviet state ensured a minimum standard of living for all the citizens. There was no unemployment. All people were involved in the production work. The government
subsidized basic necessities including health education, childcare and other welfare schemes. State ownership was the dominant form of ownership; land and productive assets were owned and controlled by Soviet State. Q.4. What was Cuban Missile Crises? Describe its events in Chronical Order. [CBSE Delhi 2014] Ans. Cuba is a small island nation off the coast of the United States. In 1962, Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of Soviet Union decided to place nuclear weapons in Cuba which put US under fire from close range. US president Kennedy was not willing for a full scale nuclear war. But for the safer sides of his country, he was determined to get Khrushchev to remove the missiles and nuclear weapon from Cuba. When Kennedy ordered American warships to intercept any Soviet ship heading to Cuba as a way of warning the USSR of his seriousness, then it seemed as if war would definitely come into existence. This is known as ‘Cubin Missile Crises’ but both the superpowers resolved the matter verbally and thus world was saved from ‘Third World War’. Cuban Missile Crises, 1962 was the most challenging year of Cold War. America even supported corrupt governments in order to stop communism. Batista’s government in Cuba was an example. This government was unrooted by Fidel Castro in 1959. Castro took help from USSR in order to become free from the control of America. America tried to enter in Cuba from ‘Bay of Pigs’. At the same time, in 1962, American spy ship took pictures of Russian Missile Base. Russian missiles in Cuba took the coin on their side. American President, John F Kennedy ordered his army to get prepared and asked Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev to remove the missiles. When Soviet warships with missiles headed towards Cuba, then world experienced the fear of first nuclear war between the two superpowers. Khrushchev said, “If president ensures that America would not attack on Cuba and would raise the besiegement, then no issue of missiles in Cuba would be there. We should not stretch those ends of rope where there are knots of war because the more we stretch, the more tighten the knot becomes.” American President Kennedy accepted proposal of Khrushchev and removed missiles and Russia removed missiles and sent them back to USSR. This was the end of that nuclear war which never took place. The close relationship between USA and USSR was developed after the end of crises. The establishment of hot line, a direct phone facility from Moscow to white house in 1983 was there. In the same year, both the superpowers signed limited Test Ban Treaty. Even after this, war took place between alliances, supported by the two superpowers in other parts of the world, but they tried to escape from one more another world war. Fortunately, Third World War didn’t take place. Q.5. Various important treaties were signed between USSR and America to limit the spread of nuclear weapons after disintegration of Soviet Union from 1945 to 1991. Those treaties are as follows:
Ans. Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT): This treaty banned nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water. It was signed by the US, UK and USSR in Moscow on 5 August, 1963. It entered into force on 10 October 1963. (i) Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT): This treaty was signed in Washington, London and Moscow on 1 July, 1968 at the same time and came into force on 5 March 1970. This treaty was extended indefinitely in 1995. It states that on 1 January, 1967, America, USSR (later Russia), Britain, France and China are five nuclear weapon states. As a result, it allowed only the nuclear weapon states to have nuclear weapons and stopped others from acquiring them. (ii) Strategic Arms Limitation Talks I (SALT-I): The first round of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks began in November 1969 on a high level at America and USSR. After long conversation of two and half years, the Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev and the US President Richard Nixon signed the following in Moscow: • •
Treaty on the limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile System (ABM Treaty). Interim Agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms.These two agreements or treaties were signed on 3 October, 1972.
(iii) Strategic Arms Limitation Talks-II (SALT-II): After the above treaties came into force, second round was started immediately between the two superpowers. The US President Jimmy Carter and the soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev signed the treaty on the limitation of strategic offensive arms in Vienna on 18 June, 1979. (iv) Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty I (Start-I): This treaty was signed by the USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and the US President George Bush (Senior). This treaty aims at the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms. (v) Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty II (Start-II): This treaty was signed by the Russian President Boris Yeltsin and the US President George Bush (Senior) on the reduction and limitation of strategic-offensive arms in Moscow on 3rd January, 1983. Q.6. Describe New International Economic Order (NIEO). Ans. Most of the non-aligned countries were newly independent which had just now got freedom from colonial rules. Their economy was backward and poverty, unemployment and other such miseries were common. The non-aligned countries were more than merely mediators during the Cold War. The challenge for most of the non-aligned countries – a majority of them were categorized as LDCs (Least Developed Countries) were to be more developed economically and to lift their people out of poverty. Economic development was also vital for the independence of new-countries. The idea of NewInternational Economic Order (NIEO) originated with this realization. The United Nation Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) brought out a report in 1972 entitled ‘Towards a New Trade Policy for development’. The report proposed a reform of the global trading system so as:
1. Give the LDCs control over their natural resources exploited by the developed western nations. 2. Obtain access to the western markets so that the LDCs could sell their products and therefore make trade more beneficial for the poorer countries. 3. Reduce the cost of technology from western countries. 4. Provide the LDCs with a greater role in international economic institutions. Gradually, the nature of non-alignment changed to greater importance to economic issues. In 1961, at the first summit in Belgrade, economic issues had not been very important. The fourth summit was held at Algiers in 1972 in which 72 countries participated. In this summit, due to demand for the formation of NIEO, NAM became an ‘economic pressure group’. Further summits were held at Havana (1979), New Delhi (1986), Belgrade (1989), Cartagena (1995), Kuala Lumpur (2003) and then again at Havana (2006) aimed at north-south convention based on equality and fairness. However, by the late 1980s, NIEO’s initiative started to fade because of the developed countries, who acted as a united group against. This occurred with the aim to maintain unity among nonaligned countries due to stiff opposition of developed countries.
