Very Short Answer
Q.1. What was Soviet System? Ans. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republic (USSR) came into being after the socialist revolution in Russia in 1917. The revolution was inspired by the ideals of socialism and the need for an egalitarian society. This attempt was to abolish the institution of private property and consciously design a society based on principles of equality. Q.2. Write two features of Soviet Union. [CBSE Delhi 2014] Or Explain any two features of Soviet Political System. [CBSE Delhi 2012] Ans. Two features of Soviet Political System are as follows: 1. To give preference to communist party without accepting any other political party’s identity. 2. To develop the economy, planned and controlled by the state. Q.3. What do you understand by ‘Second World’? Ans. After the Second World War, the nations of Eastern Europe came under the control of USSR. Soviet army had liberated them from facist forces. The political and economic system of all these countries were moulded as per USSR’s political and socialist ideals. This group of countries was termed as ‘Second World’ or ‘Socialist bloc’. Q.4. Which was the largest ‘garage sale’ in the history of Soviet Union? [CBSE (AI) 2009] Ans. In Russia, the large state–controlled industrial complex almost collapsed, as about 90 percent of its industries were put up for Sale to private individuals and companies. Since the restructuring was carried out through market forces and not by the government— directed industrial policies, it led to the disappearance of industries virtually. This was called the ‘largest garage sale in history’ as valuable industries were undervalued and sold at throwaway prices. Q.5. Write a brief description of Vladimir Lenin. Ans. Vladimir Lenin was a young theorist. Karl Marx’s theory of communism (against capitalism) inspired him. He founded Bolshevik communist party of Russia. In 1917, he
became founder head of the Soviet Union by revolutionising against capitalism. He was an outstanding theoretician and practitioner of Marxism and succeeded in providing, it a behavioural existence. He was the inspiration for many communists all over the world. Q.6. Who was Joseph Stalin? Ans. Joseph Stalin is known to be the successor of Lenin. The credit of leading the Soviet Union during its consolidation goes to him. He introduced rapid industrialisation and forcible collectivisation of agriculture during his period (1924-53). Stalin was held responsible for the authoritarian functioning and elimination of rivals within the party. That’s why he is considered as a Great Terror of the 1930s. Q.7. Write a short note on Nikita Khruschev. Ans. He was the President of Soviet Union from 1953 to 1964, after Joseph Stalin. He was a strong opponent of Stalin’s leadership style. He introduced some reforms in 1956. He suggested the philosophy of ‘peaceful co-existence’ while trying to improve relations with the West during the Cold War. ‘Limited Test Ban Treaty’ was introduced in his period. He suppressed popular rebellion in Hungary and involved in Cuban Missile Crises. It was due to the wise decision of Khruschev and Kennedy that world was saved from the Third World War during Cuban Missile Crises. Q.8. Briefly describe the works done by Boris Yeltsin. Ans. Boris Yeltsin was the first elected President of Russia from 1991–1999. Initially, he was in communist party and later reached to the centre of the government. Gorbachev appointed him as the Mayor of Moscow. Later, he joined the critics of Gorbachev and left communist party. He played a vital role in the disintegration of Soviet Union. He was blamed for hardships, suffered by Russians in then transition from communist to Capitalist. Q.9. What do you mean by ‘Shock Therapy’? [CBSE Delhi 2013, (AI) 2014] Ans. The Collapse of Communism was followed in most of these countries by a painful process of transition from an authoritarian socialist system to a democratic capitalist system. The model of transition in Russia, Central Asia and East Europe, guided by the World Bank and the IMF came to be known as ‘Shock Therapy’. Q.10. How did Soviet Union help India in military assistance? Ans. Soviet Union provided India with military hardware when hardly any country was ready to provide India with its military and technological assistance. Indian army gets maximum of its military equipments from Russia. Soviet Union did such agreements with India, which enabled India to prepare military hardware. Q.11. When and why did India sign ‘20 year Treaty of Friendship and Peace’ with USSR?
[CBSE (AI) 2012] Ans. India signed the ‘20 year Treaty of friendship and Peace’ in August 1971 with USSR. USSR ensured India that if any outsider attacks India, USSR would provide its military support to India. Q.12. Why was USSR disintegrated? Ans. USSR could not satisfy public with its socialistic policies. Due to this, the people raised their voices against socialist rule. The eight eastern European countries involved in USSR bloc and thus changed socialist rule due to the behaviour of public. Since, it happened because of public and not because of military incapability, there was no other way in front of USSR than to stay silent and accept disintegration. Q.13. For how many years did ‘Civil War’ continue in Tajikistan? When did Civil War end? [CBSE Delhi 2012] Ans. Tajikistan witnessed ‘Civil War’ for ten years, till 2001.
