Very Short Answer
Q.1. Which two alternate centres arose/emerged after the end of bipolar structure? Ans. After the end of bipolar structure, in Europe, the European union (EU), and in Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) have emerged as forces to reckon with. While evolving regional solutions to their historical enmities and weaknesses, both the EU and the ASEAN have developed alternative institutions and conventions thatbuild a more peaceful and cooperative regional order and have transformed countries in the region into prosperous economies. The economic crises of China have made a dramatic impact on the world politics. All three of these, European Union, ASEAN and China emerged as alternative centres of powers and assessed their possible role in the future. Q.2. Give a brief description of Marshall Plan. Ans. America extended massive financial help for reviving Europe’s economy. Since Marshall was America’s Foreign Minister at that time, it came to be known as the Marshall Plan. Under this plan, the organisation for European Economic Cooperation (OECC) was established to channel aid to the western European states. It became forum where the Western European states began to cooperate on trade and economic issues. An active initiation of this organisation brought success in paving a path for improving economy and for construction and development of Western European countries, which were ruined in the Second World War. Q.3. Outline the formation-process of European Union. [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. European integration after 1945 was aided by the Cold War. America extended massive financial help for reviving Europe’s economy under what was called the ‘Marshall Plan’. Under the Marshall Plan, the organisation for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) was established in 1948 to channel aid to the west European states. It became a forum where the western European states began to cooperate on trade and economic issues. The process of economic integration of European capitalist countries proceeded step by step leading to the formation of the European Economic Community in 1957. The collapse of the soviet bloc put Europe on a fast track and resulted in the foundation of European Union in 1992. Q.4. List the member countries included in European Union. Ans. The total number of countries has been expanded 28 after the involvement of Bulgaria and Romania on 1st January. Following are the names of member countries included in European Union:
1. Sweden, 2. Finland, 3. Denmark, 4. Estonia, 5. Latvia, 6. Lithuania, 7. Netherlands, 8. Ireland, 9. United Kingdom, 10. Poland, 11. Belgium, 12. Germany, 13. Luxembourg, 14. Czech Republic, 15. Slovakia, 16. France, 17. Austria, 18. Hungary, 19. Slovenia, 20. Italy, 21. Spain, 22. Portugal, 23. Malta, 24. Greece, 25. Cyprus, 26. Bulgaria, 27. Croatia, 28. Romania. Q.5. The circle of gold stars on the European Union Flag stands for what? [CBSE Delhi 2010] Or What is the significance of ‘Circle of 12 gold stars’ shown in the European Union Flag? [CBSE Delhi 2012] Ans. The circle of gold stars stands for solidarity and harmony between the people of Europe. It has 12 stars, a number 12 is traditionally the symbol of perfection, completeness and unity.
Q.6. After the establishment in 1992, what changes could be seen in European Union? Ans. The European Union has evolved over the time from an economic union to an increasingly political one. The EU has started to act more as a national state. It has its own flag, anthem, founding date, and currency. It also has some forms of a common foreign and security policy in its dealings with other nations. Q.7. Explain military capacity of European Union. Ans. European Union has strong and influential position in terms of strategy and military. The EVS combined armed forces are the second largest in the world. Its total spending on defence is second after the US. Two EU member states, Britain and France, also have nuclear arsenals of approximately 550 nuclear warheads. It is the world’s second most important source of space and communication technology. Q.8. Write a reason for the formation of European Union. [CBSE Sample Paper] Ans. European union was formed to make all European countries capable of facing world’s superpowers (America and Soviet Union) at political, economic and cultural level and also to establish unity and coordination between these countries. Q.9. Write any two features of European Union which make it an effective organisation. [CBSE Delhi 2014] Ans. Following are the two features that make European union an effective organisation: 1. Economic development: European Union was the world’s largest economy in 2005. It had a GDP of more than US $12 trillion in 2005, which was even larger than that of US. Its share of world trade is three times larger than that of the US. 2. Political and diplomatic power: The EU also has strong political and diplomatic influence. It is capable of influencing policies of all the countries including US. Q.10. What is ASEAN? Or How many countries are there in ASEAN? Write their names. Ans. ASEAN is an association of Eastern Asian nations. It was established in 1967 in Asia to increase unity and cooperation among countries of the third world. The objective of ASEAN is to accelerate economic growth, which can further expedite social progress and cultural development. There are at present 10 member countries. Only 5 countries
were included at the time of its establishment. Following countries were there at the time of establishment:
1. Malaysia 2. Indonesia 3. Singapore 4. Thailand 5. Philippines In the later years, following were added: 6. Brunei 7. Vietnam 8. Laos 9. Myanmar 10. Cambodia. Q.11. Give a brief description of ASEAN flag. Ans. In the ASEAN flag, the ten stalks of paddy (rice) represent the ten Southeast Asian countries bound together in friendship and solidarity. The circle symbolises the unity of ASEAN. Q.12. Explain the objectives of establishment of ‘ASEAN’. Or When was ASEAN established? What was its main objective? [CBSE Delhi 2013] Ans. ASEAN was established in 1967. The objectives of ASEAN were primarily to accelerate economic growth, which can further promote ‘social progress and cultural development’. It was also to promote regional peace and stability based on the rule of law and the principles of the ‘Charter of the United Nations’. ASEAN countries have celebrated what has become known as the ‘ASEAN way’, a form of interaction that is informal, non confrontationist and co-operative. The respect for national sovereignty is critical to the functioning of ASEAN. Q.13. What are the objectives of establishing regional organisations? [NCERT] Ans. The objectives of regional organisations are to find the solutions of the differences and historical enmities existing at regional levels, to resolve them in a peaceful manner, to develop peace and tranquillity and to develop economically. ASEAN and EU are the two examples of regional associations. Q.14. How has ‘Open door’ policy benefitted China? Write two examples.
Ans. In 1978, the then leader of Communist Party, Deng Xiaoping announced the ‘open door’ policy and economic reforms in China. This generated higher productivity by investments of capital and technology from abroad. The new economic policies helped the Chinese economy to break from stagnation. Privatisation of agriculture led to aremarkable rise in agricultural production and rural incomes. High personal savings in the rural economy lead to an exponential growth in rural industry. The Chinese economy, including both industry and agriculture, grew at a faster rate. The new trading laws and the creation of Special Economic Zones led to a phenomenal rise inforeign trade. Q.15. Differentiate between the economic policies adopted by China before 1978 and after 1978. [CBSE Sample Paper] Ans. Following are the differences between the economic policies adopted by China before 1978 and after 1978: Before 1978
After 1978
(1) Controlled economy
(1) Economic reforms in China by ‘Open door’ policy.
(2) Negligible foreign trade and investments.
(2) High foreign trade and investments
Q.16. What were the reasons behind bitter relations of Indo-China? Ans. After China attacked Tibet, Dalai Lama eloped and came India. This led to enmities between the two countries. In 1950, after the Chinese takeover of Tibet, states like Arunachal Pradesh and Ladakh were shown as a part of Chinese regions. China and India were involved in a border conflict in 1962 over competing territorial claims principally in Arunachal Pradesh and in Ladakh. The relations between the two countries were thus downgraded. Q.17. Name the pillars and objectives of the ASEAN vision 2020. [NCERT] Ans. Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is rapidly growing into very important regional organisation. Its Vision 2020 has defined an outward-looking role for ASEAN in the international community. This builds on the existing ASEAN policy to encourage negotiation over conflicts in the region. Thus, ASEAN has mediated the end of Cambodian conflict and the East Timor crises. It meets annually to discuss East Asian cooperation since 1999.
