Very-Very Short Answer
Q.1. Correct and rewrite the statement: In April 1961, the leaders of China were worried that the United States of America would invade communist-ruled Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro. Ans. In April 1961, the leaders of the Union Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) were worried that the United States of America would invade communist-ruled Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro. Q.2. Complete the sentence. The western alliance was formalised into an organisation, known as ________________. Ans. North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). Q.3. State True or False: Non-Aligned Movement gave European countries a way of staying out of alliances. Ans. False. Q.4. Match the following:
i. ii. iii. iv.
‘A’ Alliance system by USA Berlin and Congo Socialism and Communism NAM
a. b. c. d.
‘B’ Josip Broz Tito Soviet Union SEATO Arenas of the Cold War
Ans. (i) – (c), (ii) – (d), (iii) – (b), (iv)– (a). Q.5. When did Cold War begin? Ans. Cold War began after the end of the Second World War. Q.6. Which two superpowers emerged after the Second World War? Ans. America and Soviet Union. Q.7. Write the full form of NATO. Ans. North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
Q.8. Define ‘Bipolarity’. [CBSE Delhi 2015] Ans. Division of the world into two power blocs led by U.S.A. and U.S.S.R. is called bipolarity. Q.9. Name two countries involved in communist bloc during Cold War. Ans. Poland and North Korea. Q.10. What is the full form of ‘SEATO’? [CBSE (AI) 2015] Ans. The Southeast Asian Treaty Organisation. Q.11. Name two countries involved in Capitalist Bloc during Cold War. Ans. France and Japan. Q.12. Name two countries involved in non-alliance during Cold War. Ans. Nigeria and Sri Lanka. Q.13. Which treaty was signed by eastern alliance to counter NATO? Ans. Warsaw Pact. Q.14. Why was the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation also called ‘Western Alliance’? [CBSE Delhi 2015] Ans. Most countries of Western Europe favoured to be with the US, which got formalised into and an organisation - the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). Hence it was also called ‘Western Alliance’. Q.15. Who was the President of America during Cuban Missile Crises? Ans. John F. Kennedy. Q.16. Who decided to place nuclear missiles in Cuba? Ans. Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union. Q.17. What was the highest point of Cold War? Ans. Cuban Missile Crises. Q.18. What did Kennedy order during Cuban Missile Crises? Ans. Kennedy ordered American warships to intercept any soviet ship heading to Cuba as a way of warning the USSR of its seriousness.
Q.19. When was the First World War fought? Ans. First World War was fought during 1914-1918. Q.20. When did Second World War end? Ans. In 1945. Q.21. Who were leading allied forces during the Second World War? Ans. America, Soviet Union, Britain and France. Q.22. Which countries headed the coalition, ‘Axis Powers’? Ans. In the hands of Italy, Germany and Japan. Q.23. On which two Japanese cities did America drop atomic bombs? Ans. Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Q.24. What were the code-names of the atomic bombs dropped by America on two Japanese cities? Ans. The code-names of the atomic bombs dropped by America on two Japanese cities were ‘Little Boy’ and ‘Fat Man’. Q.25. What do you mean by deterrence? Ans. When both sides have the capacity to retaliate against an attack and to cause so much destruction that neither of the two can afford to initiate war, deterrence is said to be occurred. Q.26. Which organisation was formalised by Western Alliance? Ans. North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). Q.27. Which organisation came into existence in April 1949? [ CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). Q.28. What is known as ‘Warsaw Pact’? Ans. The eastern alliance is known as Warsaw Pact. Q.29. On which places were two superpowers poised for direct confrontations? Ans. Korea, Berlin and Congo. Q.30. Who acted as mediator in Congo Crises? Ans. Chief Secretary of United Nations Organisation. Q.31. Which alliance can probably control the powers of America?
[CBSE (Comptt.) 2012] Ans. North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). Q.32. Why was the Warsaw Pact also called the ‘Eastern Alliance’? [CBSE Delhi 2015] Ans. Most countries of the Eastern Europe had joined the alliance led by USSR-i.e., the Warsaw pact- hence it is also known Eastern Alliance. Q.33. Who provided third alternative to newly decolonised countries in bipolarity? Ans. Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Q.34. Who were the leaders of Non-aligned Movement? Ans. Jawaharlal Nehru, Sukarno, Josip Broz Tito, Gamal Abdel Nasser and Kwame Nkrumah. Q.35. What is Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)? Ans. The foreign policy of remaining independent, non-allied by staying away from alliance of two world’s superpowers. Q.36. Which report was brought out by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) in 1972? Ans. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) brought out a report in 1972 entitled ‘Towards a New Trade Policy for Development’. Q.37. Which alliance did India support during the Cold War? Ans. India’s policy was neither negative nor passive. India didn’t support either of the alliances during the Cold War. India was in favour of actively intervening in World affairs to soften Cold War rivalries. Q.38. What was the strength of the non-aligned countries as mediators between the super powers? Ans. The strength of the Non-aligned countries as mediators between the super powers was based on their unity and their resolve to remain Non-aligned despite the attempts by the two super powers to bring them into their alliances. Q.39. With whom did India sign the treaty of friendship in 1971? Ans. India signed the treaty of friendship with USSR in August, 1971. Q.40. What do you mean by neutrality? Ans. Neutrality refers principally to a policy of staying out of war. Q.41. When and where was first non-alliance Summit held? [CBSE (Comptt.) 2012]
Ans. First non-alliance summit was held in Belgrade in 1961. Q.42. How many countries attended first non-alliance summit? Ans. First non-alliance summit was attended by 25 countries. Q.43. At present, how many countries are involved in non-alliance movement? Ans. At present, 120 countries are involved in non-alliance movement. Q.44. Who is known by the name of ‘Third World’? Ans. The member countries of non-aligned movement are known as ‘Third World’. Q.45. Is NAM neutral? [CBSE Sample Paper 2015] Ans. No. NAM is not neutral because neutrality means staying out of wars, whereas NAM countries were involved in wars. But at the same time, it promoted world peace. Neutrality does not aim at ending wars. Q.46. What is disarmament? Ans. It is a process and policy of reduction of production and control of disastrous weapons.
