Short Answer Questions
Q.1. How was European Union established? Ans. Second World War shattered many of the assumptions and structures on which the European states had based their relations. In 1945, the European states confronted the ruin of their economies and the destruction of the assumptions and structures on which Europe had been founded, European integration after 1945 was aided by the Cold War. America extended massive financial help for reviving Europe’s economy under the ‘Marshall Plan’. The US also created a new collective security structure under NATO. Under the Marshall Plan, the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) was established in 1948 to channel aid to the west European states. The Councilof Europe, established in 1949, was another step forward in political cooperation. The process of economic integration of Western European countries led to the formation of European Economic Community (EEC) in 1957. This process acquired a political dimension with the creation of the European Parliament. The collapse of the Soviet bloc put Europe on a fast track and resulted in the establishment of the ‘European Union’ in 1992. Q.2. How was ASEAN established? Ans. Before and during the Second World War, south eastern region of Asia suffered the economical and political consequences of repeated colonialisms, both European and Japanese. At the end of the war, it confronted problems of nation building, the ravages of poverty and economic backwardness and the pressure to align with great poweror another during the cold war. This was the receipt for conflict, which the countries of southeast Asia could ill afford. Efforts at Asian and Third World Unity, such as the Bandung conference and the Non-Aligned Movement were ineffective in establishing the conventions for informal cooperation and interaction. Hence, the Southeast Asian nations sought an alternative by establishing the Association for southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). ASEAN was established in 1967 by five countries of this region – Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand – by signing the ‘Bangkok Declaration’. Q.3. Write any four features of ASEAN. [CBSE Delhi 2013] Ans. (i) ASEAN countries adopted a form of interaction, that is informal, nonconfrontationist, and cooperative. This was known as ‘ASEAN way’. (ii) ASEAN is an economic organisation. ASEAN regions is a small economy as compared to that of Japan, the EU and the US. But its economy is growing faster and it is emerging than all these.
(iii) ‘ASEAN Vision 2020’ has defined an outward looking role for ASEAN in the international community. ASEAN encouraged negotiation over conflicts. Thus, ASEAN had mediated the end of the Cambodian conflict and the East Timor crises. (iv) ASEAN has focussed on creating a Free Trade Area (FTA) for investment, labour, and services. India and China have made an attractive proposition to ASEAN. (v) ASEAN’s strength lies in its policies of interaction and consultation with member states, with dialogue partners, and with other non-regional organisations. Q.4. What is meant by ‘ASEAN way’? Write its any two objectives. [CBSE Delhi 2014] Ans. Unlike the EU, there is little desire in ASEAN for supranational structures and institutions. ASEAN countries have celebrated what has become known as ‘ASEAN Way’, a form of interaction that is informal, non-confrontationist and cooperative. It has the following two objectives: 1. To accelerate economic growth which will further promote social progress and cultural development. 2. To promote regional peace and stability based on the rule of law and the principles of the ‘Charter of the United Nations’. Q.5. Explain India’s policies towards ASEAN. Ans. ASEAN is rapidly growing into a very important regional organisation. The current economic strength of ASEAN, especially its economic relevance as a trading and investment partner to the growing Asian economies such as India and China, makes this an attractive proposition. ASEAN which came into effect in 1967, held no importance inIndia’s foreign policy. But 1991, India adopted the policy of ‘Go towards East’. This has helped Asian countries like Japan, South Korea, China to expand their trade. Its trade relations have become cordial with ASEAN as well. It has signed FTA with Singapore and Thailand, two members of ASEAN. It is trying to sign an FTA with ASEAN itself. Q.6. Write the opportunities of ASEAN. Ans. The opportunities of ASEAN are as follows: 1. ASEAN has adopted the policy as a form of interaction which is informal, nonconfrontationist and cooperative instead of organisation. 2. ASEAN is principally an economic association. Its economy is much faster than that of US, the EU and Japan, leading to the growth in its influence. 3. ASEAN has adopted a policy that encourages negotiation over conflicts in the region. Thus, ASEAN has mediated the end of Cambodian conflict and the East Timor crises.
4. ASEAN has focused on creating a Free Trade Area (FTA) for investment, labour and services. 5. ASEAN has captured the attention of countries with developing economies like China and India. India has signed Free Trade Areas (FTAs) with two ASEAN members, Singapore and Thailand. It is trying to sign an FTA with ASEAN itself. Q.7. Write about the treaties of India-China. Ans. Hu Jintao, Chinese President during India visit in November 2006 along with Indian Prime Minister, signed 13 different treaties related to agriculture, science and water resources. Ten year trade policy is also included in this. Eight-paged announcement letter was also released at the end of the dialogue. Following were included in that: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
To increase Indo-China trade to $40 billions. Agreement on increase in nuclear arms in civilian regions. Agreement for opening embassy except in Kolkata and Guangdong. Agreement on assistance in oil and natural gas. To improve trust with Defence cooperation. To fasten the work done by United work force formed due to boundary conflicts. China’s promise to help during trip to Kailash Mansarovar and to open alternate route. 8. To improve mutual cooperation in communication and technology. 9. To celebrate ‘India festival’ in China and ‘China festival’ in India and to announce 2007 as the year of India-China relationship day by tourism. 10. To promise triple conference to be held by China, India and Russia on regional and international affairs. Q.8. Mention any four factors that led to the rise of the Chinese economy. [CBSE Sample Paper 2015] Ans. (i) Open door policy and economic reforms. (ii) Four modernizations (agriculture, industry, science and technology, military) in 1973 by Zhou Enlai. (iii) Elimination of trade barriers in SEZs. (iv) Ended its political and economic isolation. Q.9. While the Chinese economy has improved dramatically, why has every Chinese not received the benefits of the reforms? Give any four reasons. [CBSE Delhi 2016] Ans. The benefits of the reform have not been uniform because:
i.
ii. iii. iv.
The one child policy has skewed the demography in china with an expected increase in old population in the future and decrease in the girl population due to infanticide. The population of China has increased dramatically and the economy has not been able to absorb so many people thereby leading to unemployment. There has lopsided development with the coastal parts of China, receiving the majority of the benefits of the reforms as compared to the interiors. There has not been an equal distribution of wealth across China leading to income and wealth inequality.
