Short Answer Questions
Q.1.What is the full form of WTO? When was it setup? How does it function? [CBSE Delhi 2016] Ans. The full form of WTO is World Trade Organisation. It was setup in 1995. WTO is a forum to negotiate and conduct talks on matters related to trade between various countries. WTO also has mechanism to solve trade disputes between countries. Q.2. Describe the main principles of the UN. Ans. Following are the main principles of the UN: (i) It accepts and believes in the principle of sovereignty of all nations and treating them equally. (ii) It is the responsibility of the UN members that they follow responsibilities mentioned in its charter. (iii) Issues and conflicts to be solved in peaceful ways rather than misusing powers by powerful nations, so that international peace and cooperation is maintained. (iv) All states should respect political independence and state sovereignty of other states. (v) The states should cooperate on all actions taken by the UN. (vi)The UN will not interfere in internal matters of any state. Q.3. What do you know about the UN General Assembly? Ans. The General Assembly is an integral part of the UN. All UN member states are involved in General Assembly. Each member state can nominate maximum five representatives but only one vote can be given by each member state. Usually, only one conference is held for the General Assembly in September-October. However, several conferences can be held if needed. The main functions of the UN General Assembly are as follows: 1. To think and propose effective solutions to the problems related to peace, cooperation, safety and human rights all over the world. 2. Make Security Council aware of serious problems which could threaten International Peace. 3. To pass the UN budget. 4. To elect members of other UN components.
5. To elect the UN Secretary General on the approach of 10 non-permanent members of the UN security council, 54 members of economic and social council. 6. To help new countries join as UN members and to take decisions if anyone wishes to terminate membership. Q.4. How many member states of the UN have veto powers and why? [CBSE (AI) 2011] Ans. 5 permanent member states of the UN – America, Britain, China, France and Russia have veto powers. These powers are given to them because their agreement is necessary in the international affairs to be discussed in the UN or the UN Security Council. If any one disagrees or opposes the proposed solution, then the proposal ends up. Q.5. What is International Monetary fund? Ans. Some organisations had played a very important role after the Cold War, especially IMF. The International Monetary fund (IMF) is an international organisation that oversees those financial institutions and regulations that act at the international level. The IMF has 189 member countries but they do not enjoy an equal status. The top ten countries have more than 52% of the votes. They are G-8 members. (The US, Japan, Germany, France, the UK, Italy, Canada and Russia), China and Saudi Arabia. The US alone has 17.4% voting rights. Q.6. What is Human Rights Watch? Describe its main contribution to the field of Human Rights. [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. Human Rights watch is an international NGO, involved in research and advocacy on human rights. Its contributions: (i) It draws the global media’s attention to human rights abuses. (ii) It helped in building international coalitions. (iii) It made efforts to stop the use of child soldiers. (iv) It established the International Criminal court. (any three points) Q.7. Elaborate 5 main functions of the UN Secretary-General. Ans. Following are the main functions of the UN Secretary-General: 1. To implement decisions taken by different components of Union. 2. To give report of all works done by Secretariat to General Assembly.
3. To organise conferences of Security council, economic/financial and social security. 4. Security council is informed if any unrest is seen in the world. 5. To resolve international issues peacefully. 6. To survey international issues and organise international seminars. Q.8. What is Amnesty International? State its main functions. [CBSE Delhi 2016] Ans. Amnesty International is an NGO that campaigns for the protection of Human Rights.Function: (i) It prepares and publishes reports on human rights. (ii) It mainly focuses on the misconduct of the government authorities in its reports. (iii) They favour and play a major role in research, related to human rights. Q.9. Critically evaluate the difficulties involved in implementing the suggested reforms to reconstruct the UN. [NCERT] Ans. Following are the difficulties involved in implementing the suggested reforms to reconstruct the UN: 1. There should be 15 permanent members instead of 5 permanent members and veto powers should be abolished. But the present permanent members do not let the UN do so. 2. All members should have the right to vote and decisions in General Assembly should be taken on the basis of majority. But powerful nations oppose this. 3. Tenure of Secretary-General should be increased from 5 to 7 years in addition to increase in his/her rights. Its nomination should be done by non-political, impartial committee so that he/she does not have to depend upon permanent countries. On the other hand, permanent members are not in favour of their alternative measure.Domination of permanent member states can be seen in the UN and they do not like any interference in their rights and powers. They have interest in the UN only because of ‘veto powers’. Apart from this, the US interfere in the decisions of the UN. It even plays a role in the nomination of the GeneralSecretariat. Reforms in the UN organisation is difficult due to these problems. Q.10. What is World Bank? Ans. The World Bank was created immediately after the second world war in 1945. Its activities are focused on the developing countries. It works for human development (education, health), agriculture and rural development (irrigation, rural services, establishing and enforcing regulations), infrastructure (roads, urban regeneration, electricity) and governance (anti-corruption, development of legal institutions). It
provides loan and grants to the member countries. More poorer nation need not to pay that back. In this way, it exercises enormous influence on the economic policies of global economy. Q.11. Why do some countries question the issue of India’s inclusion as a permanent member of the UN Security Council? Explain. [CBSE Delhi 2016] Ans. Some countries question India’s entry to UNSC because: (i) India is involved in boundary disputes with Pakistan and China and is therefore opposed by both the nations. (ii) Some countries are concerned with India’s nuclear weapons. (iii) The P-5 countries are reluctant to share the veto power with another nation. (iv) There are many other countries in competition for a permanent seat. (v) Asia is already represented in the UNSC while Africa and South America are not.
