Very Short Answer
Q.1. What is Cold War? Or What do you mean by Cold War? [CBSE Delhi 2011, 2014] Ans. Cold War is a situation in which rivalries, confrontations and struggle continue to stay between nations but that do not lead to any kind of a war. Soviet Union and America emerged as two superpowers after the end of Second World War. Both the nations were competitive enough in possession of nuclear weapons and power. Both the nations were poised with confrontations and competition but none of them initiated any direct war. The situation of confrontation and struggle came to be known as ‘Cold War’. Q.2. Which two ideologies were involved in a conflict during the Cold War era and why? [CBSE Delhi 2016] Ans. Capitalism and communism were the two ideologies in conflict during the Cold War. United States followed the policy of capitalism and Soviet Union followed communism and wanted to increase their influence throughout the world and thereby came in conflict. Q.3. Name two superpowers responsible for Cold War. When did world become Polarised? [CBSE Delhi 2013] Ans. America and Soviet Union were the two superpowers responsible for Cold War. World became polarised after the disintegration of Soviet Union in 1991. Q.4. State two arenas of Cold War along with example of each. [CBSE Sample Paper] Ans. (i) North Korea (supported by USSR) Vs South Korea (supported by USA). (ii) Northern Vietnam (supported by USSR) Vs Southern Vietnam (supported by USA) Q.5. Explain any two military features of Cold War. [CBSE Delhi 2010]
Ans. (i) Military alliance like – NATO, Warsaw Pact, etc., were formed and maximum nations were included. (ii) Creation of missiles and weapons, their installation at important centres with a view to threatening. Q.6. Which two eminent international personalities played an important role in Cuban Missile Crises? Also state their respective countries. [CBSE (Comptt.) 2012] Ans. (i)John F Kennedy and (ii) Nikita Khrushchev They belonged (1) America, and (2) Soviet Union respectively. Q.7. What do you mean by arena of Cold War? Give a brief description of any two such arenas. [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. Arena of Cold War refers to the areas where crises and war almost occurred or threatened to occur between the alliance systems but did not cross certain limits. The two such arenas are NATO and Warsaw Pact. Q.8. State important events happened after Second World War. Ans. (i) Emergence of two superpowers, Soviet Union and America. (ii) Formation of United Nations Organisation. (iii) Emergence of Cold War in 1945 and its end in 1990. (iv) Beginning of Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). Q.9. What is meant by Marshal Plan? [CBSE (Comptt.) 2012] Ans. Marshal plan was named after US foreign Minister. Under this plan, European countries were helped by America and consequently, their economic conditions came at the same level as it was before war in a very less period of time. This helped in improvement of economic conditions of western European countries. Q.10. What is NATO? Ans. The bipolarity system gave birth to military alliance. In April 1949, under the leadership of America, alliance was formalised into an organisation, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). It was an association of twelve states which declared that armed attack on any one of them in Europe or North America would be regarded as an attackon all of them. Each of these states would be obliged to help the others. Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxemburg, Netherland or Holland, Norway, Portugal, Britain and America were involved in this. Later on, Greece, West Germany and Turkistan were also included in this treaty. Q.11. Write any one Eastern alliance and any three Western alliance in the era of Cold War. [CBSE Delhi 2008] Ans. Eastern alliance: Warsaw Pact Western alliance: (i) North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) (ii) South East Asian Treaty Organisation (SEATO) and (iii) Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO) or Baghdad Pact. Q.12. Why did India not support any of the two blocs during the Cold War? [CBSE Delhi 2012] Ans. India did not get involved in any of the blocs to save its sovereignty. At that time, India needed economic development, regional unity and integrity rather than politics. India didn’t want any kind of obstacle in its development by supporting any of the blocs. To summarise, India wanted its overall development by staying away from any alignment. Q.13. Explain any two effects of the end of Cold War. [CBSE (AI) 2010] Ans. (i) End of struggle and rivalries in the world. America and Russia came close to each other. (ii) End of bipolarity in world’s politics and beginning of American era. Q.14. In spite of being a major threat to international peace and security, nuclear weapons did play an important role in deterring the outbreak of III World war during the cold war period. Comment. [CBSE Sample Paper 2016] Ans. Nuclear weapons played an important role in deterring III World War because of the fear of mutually assured destruction. Q.15. Which treaties were signed by Soviet Union and America to limit their arms? Ans. Limited Test Ban Treaty; Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty; and Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. Q.16. Comment on the role played by Jawaharlal Nehru as a World Leader.
Ans. Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), first Prime minister of India (1947-64) made efforts for Asian unity, decolonisation and nuclear disarmament. He was one of the important founders of non-aligned movement. He advocated peaceful coexistence for securing world peace. Q.17. What constrained the Super Powers to go for a full-fledged war in spite of having nuclear weapons? [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. Both the Super Powers knew very well the intensity of destruction that would take place. It was not acceptable to either of them. No political gain could justify the destruction of their societies. That is why they did not go for a full-fledged nuclear war. Q.18. Give a brief description of Gamal Abdel Nasser. Ans. Gamal Abdel Nasser was one of the founder members of NAM (Non-aligned Movement). He ruled Egypt till 1970. He nationalised Suez Canal which resulted in international issue of dispute. He firmly opposed Arab Nationalism, socialism and imperialism. Q.19. Who was Kwame Nkrumah? Ans. Kwame Nkrumah was the first Prime Minister of Ghana. He led the freedom movement. He decided to stay non-aligned by not involving himself in any of the superpowers. He advocated the causes of socialism and African unity and opposed neo-colonialism. He was removed in a military coup. Q.20. Give a brief description of Sukarno. Ans. Sukarno was the first president of Indonesia. He led the freedom struggle. He was strictly against socialism and imperialism. He organised the ‘Bandung’ conference but was overthrown in a military coup in the year 1965. Q.21. Give a brief description of Josip Broz Tito. Ans. Josip Broz Tito (1892-1980); President of Yugoslavia (1945-80); fought against Germany in World War-II. Josip Broz Tito was one of the founders of Non-alignment Movement with Gamal Abdul and Abdul Nasser. He was a communist, maintained distance from Soviet Union and forged unity in Yugoslavia. Q.22. What was India’s policy of non-alignment? [CBSE Delhi 2013] Or What do you understand by non-alignment? [CBSE Delhi 2014]
Ans. Non-alignment is the policy of staying away from alliance and praising or criticizing the works done by alliance without any discrimination. The countries which adopted the principle of non-alignment are free to adopt their national or international policies. They are not under any pressure for adopting policy of any alliance. Q.23. Name two foreign leaders who are known as founder of NAM with their respective countries. [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. Two foreign leaders are— Egyptian leader, Gamal Abdel Nasser and Yugoslavia’s Josip Broz Tito. Q.24. Who had a great contribution in the formation of NAM? Ans. Yugoslavia’s Josip Broz Tito, India’s Jawaharlal Nehru and Egypt’s leader, Gamal Abdel Nasser had a great contribution in the formation of Non-alignment movement. These three held a meeting in 1956. Indonesia’s Sukarno and Ghana’s Kwame Nkrumah strongly supported them. These five leaders came to be known as founders of NAM. Q.25. Name any four founders of NAM and the countries they belonged to respectively. [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. The founders of NAM and their countries are: (i) Joseph Tito from Yugoslavia (ii) Jawaharlal Nehru from India (iii) Gamal Abdul Nasser from Egypt (iv) Sukharno from Indonesia Q.26. State reasons for the emergence and development of non-aligned movement. Ans. Reasons for the emergence and development of non-aligned movement were as follows: (i) Expansion of Cold War and its increasing arena and emergence of many newly independent African countries. (ii) Determination of co-operation between India, Yugoslavia, Egypt, Indonesia and Ghana. Q.27. What were the benefits of non-alignment to India?
Ans. (i) Due to the policy of non-alignment, India could receive socio-economic help by maintaining friendly relationships with both the superpowers. (ii) India acted as trustworthy to both the superpowers and continued to take their help in its development. Q.28. ‘Non-alignment does not mean neutrality or equal distance.’ What does this statement mean? [CBSE (AI) 2013] Ans. Non-alignment does not mean neutrality or equal distance, i.e., not keeping itself away by being neutral or at an equal distance from the international affairs of America and Soviet Union. Instead, it implies supporting or opposing one side on the basis of logic or positives or negatives.
