Very Short Answer
Q.1. When and why was UN founded? Ans. The UN was founded on 24th October, 1945. Its head office is in New York (America). By 2017, the UN had 193 member states. It was established to prevent war, to set mutual peace and cooperation and to work for the welfare of public. Q.2. Mention any two objectives of UN. [CBSE Delhi 2010] Ans. Two objectives of UN are as follows: 1. Coming generations should be free from wars. 2. Friendly relationships to be developed among nations. Q.3. What are the principal organs of the United Nations? Ans. Six principal organs of United Nations are as follows: 1. General Assembly, 2. Security Council, 3. Economic and Social council, 4. Trusteeship Council, 5. International Court of Justice, 6. Secretariat. Q.4. List any four components of UN. [CBSE Delhi 2014] Ans. 1. General Assembly: All member nations of UN are included in general assembly. Every member nation has a right to nominate a maximum of 5 members but their vote is considered one. 2. Security Council: This is the most important organ of UN. It works like its executive minister. 5 permanent members (America, Britain, France, China and Russia) along with 10 nonpermanent members are included, which are chosen by General Assembly to serve for two years. A total of 15 members are included. 3. International Court of Justice: 15 judges are included. It is located at Hague, Holland.
4. Secretariat: This is the head office of the UN. The Secretary General is appointed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Security Council for a 5-year renewable term. 5 member states should agree. Q.5. Write a short note on the logo of UN. Ans. In logo of UN, the emblem has a world map as it is an international organisation. The map has olive branches around it, which signifies world peace. Q.6. What is Amnesty International? Ans. Amnesty International is an NGO that campaigns for the protection of human rights all over the world. It promotes respect for all the human beings in the universal declaration of human rights. It believes that human rights are interdependent and indivisible. It prepares and publishes reports on human rights. Governments are not always happy with these reports since a major focus of Amnesty is the misconduct of government authorities. Nevertheless, these reports play an important role in research and advocacy on human rights. Q.7. How many members of Security Council of United Nations have veto power? Ans. Five permanent members of United Nations Security Council — 1. United States of America, 2. Britain, 3. Russia, 4. China and 5. France have veto power. Q.8. What is a ‘Veto’ power? Ans. ‘Veto’ power is that power which enables permanent member states of UN to prevent from taking a decision, not matter if rest of the permanent members and non-permanent members have voted in favour of the decision. Q.9. Which are the agencies that deal with economic and social issues in UN? Ans. These agencies are as follows: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
World Health Organisation (WHO) United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) United Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)
Q.10. What is Apartheid? What are efforts done by the UN in order to eliminate Apartheid?
Ans. Apartheid is a discrimination based on colour and breed, which is anti-democratic and antihumanity. Following were the two ways adopted by the UN to eliminate Apartheid in past years: 1. Political constraints were directed by UN in 1954 against the government of South Africa, which favoured Apartheid. 2. Economic constraints against Rhodesia by UN in 1956. Q.11. What do you understand by ‘Human Rights Watch’? Ans. Human Right Watch is international NGO involved in research and advocacy on human rights. It is the largest international human rights organisation in the US. It draws the global media’s attention to human right abuses. It helps in building international coalitions like the campaigns to ban landmines, to stop the use of child soldiers and toestablish the international criminal court. Q.12. Write any two objectives of the ‘Human Rights Watch’. [CBSE Delhi 2010, 2011] Ans. Following are the two main objectives of the Human Rights Watch: 1. To recommend human rights and implement them in all the countries of the world. 2. To eliminate discrimination and exploitation like child abuse, which can be seen among all the nations. Q.13. What are the functions of the Security Council? [NCERT] Ans. Following are the functions of the Security Council: 1. It is responsible for establishing peace in the world and can think of an issue which can pose a threat to the world. 2. It can work on the complaint sent by any country and take actions over dispute or conflict. 3. It can also take military actions to implement decisions taken by the security council. It was the UN which took military action against Iraq. Q.14. Write the full form of IAEA. Why has it been formed? [CBSE Delhi (Comptt.) 2014] Ans. International Atomic Energy Agency. It seeks to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to prevent its use for military purposes. Q.15. What do you understand by International Atomic Energy Agency? Ans. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was established in 1957. It came into being to implement US president Dwight Eisenhower’s ‘Atoms for peace’ proposal. It seeks to
promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to prevent its use for military purposes. IAEA teams regularly inspect nuclear facilities. Q.16. What is World Trade Organisation? Ans. The World Trade Organisation is an international organisation, which sets the rules for global trade. This organisation was set up in 1995 as the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) created after the second world war. It has 164 member. All decisions are taken unanimously but the major economic powers such as the US, EU and Japan have managed to use the WTO to frame rules to trade to advance their own interest. The developing countries often complain of non-transparent procedures and being pushed around by big powers. Q.17. Which three elements of resolution for the reform in structures and processes of UN are reflected and adopted by General Assembly? Ans. Three elements of resolution for the reform in structures and processes are as follows: 1. The security council of UN no longer represents contemporary political realities. 2. Its decisions reflect only western values and interests and are dominated by a few powers. 3. It lacks equitable representation. Q.18. Mention any two functions of World Bank. [CBSE (AI) 2014] Ans. 1. World Bank provides loans and grants to the member countries. 2. Also help for human development, agriculture, environment, infrastructure and in enforcing regulations. Q.19. Though UN is an imperfect body but can the world survive without its presence? Ans. The UN is an imperfect body, but without it, the World would be worse off. Given the growing connection and interdependence, it is hard to imagine how more than seven billion people would live together without an organisation such as the UN. Technology promises to increase planetary interdependence, and therefore the importance of the UN will only enhance. People and government will have to find ways to gain support and using the UN and other international organisations in ways that are consistent with their own interests and the interests of the International community more broadly.
