Very Short Answer
Q.1. What has been reported in the ‘Human Development Report’ of the United Nations? Ans. According to the Human Development Report 2006 of the United Nations Development Programme, 1.2 billion people in developing countries have no access to clean and safe water and 2.6 billion have no access to sanitation, resulting in the death of more than three million children every year. Q.2. What is the importance of Natural forests? Ans. Importance of Natural Forests are as follows: 1. Helps to stabilise the climate 2. Mediates water supplies 3. Harbour a majority of the planet’s biodiversity on land 4. Land is saved from getting converted into barren. Q.3. How does issues of environmental degradation became a part of world politics? [CBSE Delhi 2008] Ans. Issues of environmental degradation became a part of world politics because environment was getting affected due to the economic development. An effective and concerned initiative was to be taken in order to curb the negative effect on environment. Q.4. How do developing countries argue on environmental degradation? Ans. Developing countries argue that most of the contributions in harming our environment is of developed countries. So, the developed countries should take most of the responsibilities in saving environment. Developing countries are reluctant in having mutual consent of responsibilities with developed countries. Q.5. Among which countries were violent struggles seen on water issues? Ans. There was a struggle between Israel, Syria and Jordan in 1950s and 1960s over attempts by each side to divert water from the Jordan and Yarmulke Rivers, and more recent threats between Turkey, Syria, and Iraq over the construction of dam on the Euphrates River. Q.6. Why should ‘environmental degradation issues’ be seen as a part of contemporary world politics?
Ans. At present, most of the steps to check environmental degradation are such that no single government can address them fully. Therefore, they have to become part of world politics. They fall within the scope of contemporary world politics. Q.7. Write a short note on Movements against Mega-dams. Ans. In every country where a mega dam is being built, one is likely to find an environmental movement opposing it. Increasingly, anti-dam movements are pro-river movements for more sustainable and equitable managements of river systems and valleys. The early 1980s saw the anti-dam movement launched in the North, namely the campaign tosave the Franklin River and its surrounding forests in Australia. This was a wilderness and forest campaign as well as anti dam campaign. At present, there has been a surge in mega-dam building in the south, from Turkey to Thailand to South Africa, from Indonesia to China. India has had some of the leading anti-dam, pro river movements. Narmada Bachao Andolan, Tehri-dam-movement are good example of it. Main features of such Andolan is the shared idea of non-violence. Q.8. Suggest any two steps to be taken by the government to check pollution and save environment. [CBSE Delhi 2015] Ans. Steps taken by the government to check pollution and save environment are: (i) More plantation. (ii) Auto fuel policy. (iii) To frame policies to reduce pollution created by industries. (iv) Use of renewable energy. (v) Ban on polluting vehicles. Q.9. Who are Indigenous peoples? Ans. The UN defines indigenous population as comprising the descendants of peoples who inhabited the present territory of a country at the time when persons of different culture or ethnic origin arrived there from other parts of the world and overpowered them. Indigenous people today live more in conformity with their particular social, economic, and cultural customs and traditions than the institutions of the country of which they now form a part. Q.10. What is Kyoto Protocol? Ans. The Kyoto Protocol is an international agreement setting targets for industrialised countries to cut their greenhouse gas emissions. Certain gases like Carbon dioxide, Methane, Hydro-Fluoro carbons etc. are considered partly responsible for global warming the rise in global temperature which may have disastrous consequences forlife on Earth. The protocol was agreed to in 1997 in Kyoto in Japan. India signed Kyoto
Protocol in August 2002. India, China and other developing countries were exempted from the requirements of Kyoto Protocol because their contribution to the emission of green-house gases during the industrialisation period was not significant.
