HOTS (Higher Order Thinking Skills)
Q.1. In which matters do international organisations help? Ans. To establish better living conditions in various countries in the times and matters of peace and war. Q.2. What is the threat from global warming? Ans. It can cause sea level to rise. If this happened, the cities at the bank of seas will be submerged. Q.3. What is important to stop increasing temperature globally? Ans. This requires all of the major industrial powers to cooperate. Q.4. Write any two changes that could be seen in the world politics after 1991. Ans. 1. The Soviet Union has collapsed 2. The US is the strongest power. Q.5. Suggest ways to make UN contemporary in changing environment. Ans. 1. Creation of a peace building commission. 2. Establishment of a Human Rights Council. Q.6. Why is India’s participation appropriate as a permanent UN member? Ans. 1. India is the World’s largest democracy. 2. India has participated in virtually all of the initiatives of the UN. Q.7. What is the need of international organisations like UN? [CBSE Delhi 2013] Ans. International Organisations like UN are very important. They help in the matters of war and peace. They also help countries cooperate to make better living conditions. An international organisation provide a platform to resolve and discuss contentious issues and find peaceful solutions. Q.8. Why was UN established? Ans. After First World War (1914-18), League of Nations established in the year 1920. The objective was to resolve the International conflict and differences without going to war. But it could not succeed in its objectives and the second world war began on 1st September, 1939. Many more people died and were wounded in this war than ever before. So the immediate need of more powerful organisation was felt. The objective
was similar to that further generation of human being could be saved from massive destruction. Resultant, United Nations was established on 24th October, 1945. Any state which have faith in its objectives and order can be its member. At present its memberstates are increased from 51 to 193. Q.9. What changes occurred in world politics after second world war? Ans. After second world war, some of the changes that have occurred are as follows: 1. The Soviet Union has collapsed. 2. The US is the strongest power. 3. The relationship between Russia, the successor the Soviet Union, and the US is much more cooperative. 4. China is fast emerging as a great power, and India also is growing rapidly. 5. The economies of Asia are growing at an unprecedented rate. 6. Many new countries have joined the UN as they became independent from the Soviet Union or former communist states in eastern Europe. 7. A whole new set of challenges confronts the world genocide, civil war, ethnic conflict, terrorism, nuclear proliferation, climate change, environmental degradation, epidemics. Q.10. Critically evaluate the difficulties involved in implementing the suggested reforms to reconstruct the UN [CBSE Delhi 2015] Or Describe the two basic reforms of the UN on which almost everyone agrees that they were necessary after the Cold War. [CBSE Delhi 2016] Ans. Candidates may keep in mind the reforms as suggested by the General Assembly Resolution. However, these reforms could not be implemented due to various difficulties which are as follows: (i) As regards the veto power of permanent members, the Security Council no longer represents contemporary political realities. (ii) Disputes regarding representation on the basis of terms of economic development. (iii) Permanent members are unlikely to agree to any reform, which reduces their clout of power or interest in the world body. (iv) It lacks equitable representation. (v) The structure of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) has to be changed to reflect the current scenario. This includes the increase in the membership from Africa and Latin America.
(vi) The UN has failed on multiple counts to protect individuals from genocide, disease and ensure peace such as in Rwandan genocide. Similarly, the UN needs to take a proactive role in climate change negotiations. Q.11. As a citizen of India how would you support India’s candidature for the permanent membership of the Security Council? Justify your proposal. [NCERT] Ans. India should gain permanent membership of the Security Council because of the following features of India: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
India is the second most populous country in the world. India is the largest democracy of the world. It is emerging as an Economic power at the International Frontier. India has participated in virtually all the initiatives of the UN. It’s role in the UN’s peacekeeping efforts is a long and substantial one. India is member of UN since beginning.
Q.12. Why did India support membership of China in UN? Ans. When matter of China’s membership arose in UN, India stood in favour of China and got succeeded in making China a member of UN. Following are the reasons that motivated India to do so: 1. China has a huge population and excluding such a huge populous state from UN is not a wise move. 2. India wanted to strengthen its relation with China. 3. China’s geographical and political structure would help other member states of UN. 4. China’s fast progression in all the sectors in the past few decades, cannot be neglected. Q.13. Why was the need of improvement in UN felt and what were the parameters chosen for permanent and non-permanent membership of UN Security Council? Ans. After the end of cold war, the question facing the world was: Is UN doing enough or does it require reforms for better functioning?While the case of reform has widespread support, getting agreement on what to do is difficult. In 1992, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution. It has three basic elements which are as follows: 1. The Security Council no longer represents contemporary political realities. 2. Its decisions reflect only western values and interests and are dominated by a few powers. 3. It lacks equitable representation.
In the years since then, the following are just some of the criteria that have been proposed for new permanent and non-permanent member of Security Council. A new member should be: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
A major economic power. A major military power A substantial contributor to the UN budget A big nation in terms of its population. A nation that respects democracy and human rights. A country that would make the council more representative of world’s diversity in terms of geography, economic systems, and culture.
Q.14. Describe the composition of UN Security Council. What is the major difference in the privileges given to its permanent and non-permanent members? [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. UN Security Council is an important organ of United Nations. It has fifteen members – five permanent and ten elected by the General Assembly for two year terms. Difference in the privileges between permanent and non-permanent members: (i) The main privileges of the permanent members are permanency and the veto power, which can neglect any resolution of the Security Council. (ii) The non-permanent members serve for only two years at a time. A country cannot be re-elected immediately after completing their term. They do not have Veto power. (iii) The permanent members were not chosen through an election while nonpermanent members are elected by general assembly. Q.15. Though the UN has failed in preventing wars and related miseries, nations prefer its continuation. What makes the UN an indispensable organisation? [NCERT] Ans. Though the UN has failed in preventing wars and related miseries, nations prefer its continuation. Following are the reasons behind this thinking: 1. UN has failed in preventing small scale war. But the greatest success of UN lies in preventing the whole world from third world war which can destroy the human kind. 2. UN is the only international organisation in which 193 member countries are included. It provides a platform to discuss on issues like international peace, security, economy, social aspects with open minds. 3. It is the only platform where mutual differences are settled not by war but peacefully by filing a complaint against each other in UN security council. It has prohibited the use of chemicals and nuclear weapons.
4. UN provides medical aid in emergency and loan from World Bank and IMF to backward countries. 5. Works on certain areas like – education, epidemic, health and terrorism which cannot be done without international cooperation. 6. Unipolar system is there in the world and US hegemony is seen in the world. UN can control US. It can hold a discussion between US and other countries on certain issues. UN, alongwith its member nations can react to US hegemony and actions. Q.16. ‘Reforming the UN means restructuring of the security council.’ Do you agree with this statement? Give arguments for or against this position. [NCERT] Ans. Security Council is an integral part of the United Nations. It acts as UN’s executive head. There are five permanent members and ten non-permanent members. America, Britain, China, France and Russia are its permanent members. The non-permanent members serve for only two years at a time. There are two ways to vote to take decision in Security council. In Procedural means, vote of atleast 9 members out of 15 members should be in favour of the proposal. While taking decisions related to military, finance or other important issues, all five permanent nations should agree in addition to the votes in favour of the proposal. In other words, the proposal does not pass if any one of the permanent member is not in its favour, irrespective of the number of votes came in its favour. This process of election in the security council is known as ‘veto’ power of the permanent-members of the UN. The Security Council is a powerful organistion of the UN. It can give directions to other countries to resolve conflicts between nations or can solve them by intervention, maintaining peace, law, order and security by resolving conflicts as it is the responsibility of the Security Council. If these peaceful ways do not work, then the Security Council adopts coercive method before war. It can even order the country found guilty to break trade-commerce-financial and diplomatic relations. If coercive method does not work, then military actions against the country found guilty, can also be taken. Reforms in structure of the Security Council can pave way for the UN’s improvement as the Security Council is the backbone of the UN. The structure of the Security Council is such that it plays role of a judge in all matters, so UN cannot be improved without structural reforms in the Security Council. Q.17. Although UN has failed to act as effective checks on the hegemony of US, nations prefer its continuation. Suggest any three suitable arguments to justify the relevance of UN in the post-cold war era. [CBSE Sample Paper 2016] Ans. Relevance of UN in the post-cold war period: (i) In the unipolar world, the UN can and has served to bring US and rest of the world into discussion on various issues.
(ii) US leaders, in spite of their frequent criticisms of the UN, do see the organisation as serving a purpose in bringing together over 190 nations in dealing with conflict and socio-economic development. The UN does provide a space with in which arguments against specific US attitudes and policies are heard and compromises and concession can be shaped. (iii) Given the growing connections and links between societies and various issues of Interdependence, the importance and role of UN is likely to increase in future. Q.18. Give any three suitable arguments to support India’s candidature for the permanent membership of the UN Security Council. [CBSE (AI) 2015] Ans. (i) India is second most populous country in the World comprising almost one-fifth of the World’s Population. (ii) India is also the world’s largest democracy and has virtually participated in all of the initiatives of the UN. (iii) Its role in the UN’s peace keeping efforts is a long and substantial one. (iv) India’s economic emergence on the world stage, due to its policies of liberalisation and globalisation, has enhanced its stake for its membership. (v) India has also made regular financial contribution to the UN and never faltered on its payments. (vi) India realises that the permanent seat is of quite symbolic importance. It shows a country’s growing significance in world affairs. This greater status makes the country’s representation more powerful and its foreign policy more influential. (Any three) Q.19. State any six post-Cold War changes that have necessitated reforms to make the UN work better. [CBSE (AI) 2016] Ans. The changes that occurred in the post-Cold War: (i) The disintegration of the Soviet Union caused its seat in UNSC to be taken by Russia. (ii) The emergence of USA as the sole superpower and its hegemony in the UN. (iii) USA and Russia began to cooperate on multiple world issues. (iv) The rise of China, India, Brazil and of African nations required them to be adequately represented in UN.
(v) The rise of new conflicts such as terrorism, climate change among others. (vi) The rise of epidemic diseases such SARS, Zika virus and others and the need for Pan-World combat.
