Very-Very Short Answer
Q.1. Complete the sentence: Globalisation is a ___________ concept. Ans. Multi-dimensional. Q.2. State True or False. The consequences of globalisation are confined only to the sphere of politics and economy. Ans. False. Q.3. Correct and rewrite the statement: The World Social Forum (WSF) is a global platform, which brings many professors and intellectuals together. Ans. The World Social Forum (WSF) is a global platform, which brings together a wide coalition composed of human rights activities, environmentalists, labour, youth and women activists together. Q.4. Match the following: i. ii. iii. iv.
‘A’ Free flow of ideas Bird flu Erosion of State Sovereignty Jeans culture
a. b. c. d.
‘B’ Cultural Globalisation Political Globalisation Worldwide phenomenon Globalisation
Ans. (i) – (d), (ii) – (c), (iii) – (b), (iv) – (a). Q.5. What kind of concept is globalisation? Ans. Globalisation is a multidimensional concept. Q.6. What is the basic element of Globalisation in conceptual form? Ans. As a concept, basic element of Globalisation is Flow. Q.7. List the effect of Globalisation. Ans. Globalisation has political, economical, social and cultural effect. Q.8. Which inventions were responsible for the revolution in communication? Ans. Invention of the telegraph, the telephone and microchip has revolutionised many parts of world.
Q.9. Define Globalisation. [CBSE Sample Paper 2016] Ans. Globalisation means integration of a country’s economy with the world economy. Q.10. Which technique provides base for Nationalism? Ans. Printing (sealing) technique provide base for Nationalism. Q.11. What has been possible due to technology? Ans. The ability of ideas, capital, commodities and people to move more easily from one part of the world to another has been made possible largely by technological advances. Q.12. What is Economic Globalisation? Ans. Economic Globalisation is a process which involves greater economic flows among different countries of the world. Q.13. What are the negative effects of Globalisation? Ans. Globalisation has promoted the trend of consumerism and capitalism. Q.14. What is the political effect of Globalisation? Ans. In some aspects, globalisation reduce state capacity to protect the interests of poor but in some other aspects, state capacity has received a boost also as a consequence of globalisation as enhanced technology helps states to collect the information of its citizens. Q.15. Write one negative effect of Globalisation. Ans. It has reduced the state capacity. Q.16. To what works do states limit itself? Ans. State limits itself to perform certain core functions such as the maintenance of law and order and the security of its citizens. Q.17. How do developed countries guard their National boundaries? Ans. Developed countries have guarded their borders with Visa policies. Q.18. What is the positive effect of globalisation on state? Ans. The state capacity has received a boost with globalisation. As a consequence of globalisation, with enhanced technologies available, state can collect information about its citizens. Q.19. What has been termed as ‘recolonised’ by economists? Ans. Economists call economic globalisation as re-colonisation. Q.20. How do moderate support argue in relation to globalisation? Ans. We should face the challenges of globalisation intelligently with full care.
Q.21. What is Cultural homogenisation? Ans. In the name of global culture, imposition of western culture on the rest of the world is called cultural homogenisation. Q.22. What is ‘McDonaldisation’? Ans. Imprints of American culture over different cultures of world is called ‘McDonaldisation’. Q.23. What is Cultural heterogenisation? Ans. Globalisation leads to each culture becoming more different and distinctive. This phenomenon is called Cultural heterogenisation. Q.24. Why are Political right wing critics worried? Ans. Political right wing critics were concerned regarding cultural, economic and political effects of globalisation. Q.25. Why do the political left wing people criticise on the globalisation? Ans. Those on the left argue that contemporary globalisation represents a particular phase of global capitalism that makes the rich richer and the poor poorer. Q.26. Name the global platform against globalisation. Or Write full form of WSF Ans. World Social Forum (WSF). Q.27. When and where was the First meeting of World Social Forum held? Ans. The First WSF meeting was held in Porto, Alegre, Brazil in 2001. Q.28. Who all gather under WSF to oppose globalisation? Ans. Human rights activists, environmentalists, labour, youth and women activists oppose globalisation. Q.29. Write full form of FDI. Ans. Foreign Direct Investment. Q.30. Who has opposed Multinational Corporation in India? Ans. Trade unions of industrial workforce, people representing farmer interests.
