CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Dea

History 2019 (Outside Delhi) _
Time allowed

:3 hours

General Instructions :
(i) Answer all the questions. Some questions have
internal choice. Marks are indicated against each
question.
(ii) Answer to questions no. 1 to 3 carrying 2 marks
should not exceed 30 words each,
(iii) Answer to questions no. 4 to 9 carrying 4 marks
should not exceed 100 words each.
(iv) Answer to questions no, 10 to 12 carrying 8 marks
should not exceed 350 words each.
{v)

Questions no, 13 to 15 are source based questions,

(vi) Question no. 16 is a Map question that includes
identification and location of significant test
items. Attach the map with the answer-book.
PART-A
1. “John Marshall’s stint as Director General of the
Archaeological Survey of India marked a major
change in Indian Archaeology.” Explain the
statement.
[2]
Answer
: John Marshall, the Director General of the
Archaeological Survey of India, from 1902 — 1928
has marked a major change in Indian Archaeology
as he was the first professional archaeologist to
work in India, and brought his experience of
working in Greece and Crete to the field. He was
very much interested in spectacular finds and
equally keen to look for patterns of everyday life.
He even announced in 1924 the discovery of a new
civilization in the Indus Valley, to the world.
2. State the role played by women in agrarian
society during 16th and 17th centuries,
[2]
Answer ; Women worked with men shoulder to
shoulder in the fields. Men tilled and ploughed, while
women sowed, weeded, threshed and winnowed the

harvest. Artisanal tasks such as spinning yarn, shifting
and kneading clay for pottery, and embroidery were
among the many aspects of production dependent
on female labour.
3. Why did Jaipal Singh plead for the protection of
tribes in the Constituent Assembly P Explain any
two reasons.
[2]
OR
Explain the ideals expressed in ‘Objectives
Resolution’ introduced by Jawaharlal Nehru.
Answer : Jaipal Singh plead for the protection of
ttibes in the Constitutional Assembly because:
(i) Tribes had been dispossessed of the land they
had settled, deprived of their forests and pastures,
and forced to move in search of new homes.

www. chsepdf.com

J

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

SET I
Maximum marks : 80

{ii) Perceiving them as primitive and backward, the
rest of society had spurned them.
Through these points Jaipal Singh wanted the society
to mix with the tribes and was not asking for separate
electorates, but he felt that reservation of scats in the

lepislature was essential to allow tribals to represent
themselves.
OR
On 13th December 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru
introduced the ‘Objectives Resolution’ in the
Constituent Assembly. It proclaimed India to be an
‘Independent Sovereign Republic’, and guaranteed
its citizens justice, equality and freedom, and assured
that adequate safeguards shall be provided for

minorities, backward and tribal areas, and Depressed
and Other Backward Classes.
PART-B
4. “The most unique feature of the Harappan
civilization was the development of domestic
architecture.”’ Substantiate the statement.
[4]
Answer : The Lower Town at Mohenjondaro

provides examples of residential buildings, Many
were centred On a courtyard, with rooms on all sides.
The courtyard was probably the centre for activities
such as cooking and weaving, particularly during
hot and dry weather. There were no windows in
the walls along the ground level. Besides, the main

entrance did not give a direct view of the interior or
the courtyard. Every house had its own bathroom
paved with bricks, with drains connected through
the wall to the street drains. Some houses still have
remains of staircases to reach a second storey or
the roof. Many houses had wells, often in a room
that could be reached from the outside and perhaps
used by passers-by.
5. Examine any two evidences found by the
archaeologist B.B. Lal after excavation at a
vilage named Hastinapur in Meerut, Uttar

Pradesh.
[2x 2=4]
Answer : In 1951-52, the archaeologist B.B. Lal
excavated at a village named Hastinapura in Meerut
(Uttar Pradesh). While the similarity in names
could be coincidental, the location of the sites in
the Upper Ganga Doab, where the Kuru kingdom
was situated, suggests that it may have been the
capital of the Kurus. Lal found evidence of five
occupational levels, of which the second and third
ate of interest to us.
Lal noted about the houses in the second phase that
within the limited area excavated, no definite plans

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Dc

of houses were obtained, but walls of mud and

mud-bricks were duly encountered. The discovery of
mud-plaster with prominent reed-marks suggested
that some of the houses had teed walls plastered
over the mud, For the third phase, Lal noted that
houses of this period were built of mud-bricks as
wellas burnt bricks. Soaked jars and brick drains were
used for draining out refuse water, while terracotta
ring-wells may have been used both as wells and
drainage pits,
6. Describe the main teachings of Baba Guru
Nanak.
[4]
Answer : Teaching of Baba Guru Nanak :

Baba Guru Nanak firmly repudiated the external
practices of the religions he saw around him. He
rejected sacrifices, ritual bath, image worship,

austerities and the scriptures of both Hindu
and Muslims. He organised his followers into a
community. He set up rules for congregatonal
worship (sangat) involving collective recitation. For
Baba Nanak, the absolute or Rab had no gender
form. He proposed a simple way to connect to the
Divine by remembering and repeating the Divine’s

Name through hymns called shabad.
7. Analyse the rituals associated with Mahanavatni
Dibba at the Royal Centre in Vijayanagara. [4]
OR
Analyse the main features of Amara-Nayaka
System which was introduced in Vijanayagara
Empire,
Answer ;: Rituals associated with the structure
probably coincided with Mahanavami of the tenday Hindu festival during the autumn season. The
Vijayanagata kings displayed their prestige, power
and suzerainty on this occasion. The ceremonies
performed on the occasion included image worship,
wotship of the state horse, and the sacrifice of

buffaloes and other animals. Dances, wrestliag
matches, and processions of caparisoned horses,
elephants and chariots and soldiers, as well as ritual
presentations before the king and his guests by the
chief nayakas and subordinate kings marked the
occasion. These ceremonies were imbued with deep
symbolic meanings. On the last day of the festival
the king inspected his army and the armies of the
nayakas in a gtand ceremony in an open field. On
this occasion the kings accepred rich gifts from the
nayakas.
OR
The Amara-Nayaka

System was a major political

innovation of the Vijayanagara Empire. It is hkely
that many features of this system were derived from
the Igta system of the Delhi Sultanate. The Amara-

wwwwechsepdi.cam

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

Nayakas were military commanders who were piven
territories to govern by the Raya. They collected
taxes and other dues from peasants, craftspersons
and traders in the atea. They retained a part of
the revenue for personal use and for maintaining a
stipulated contingent of horses and elephants. These
contingents provided the Vijayanagara kings with an
effective fighting force with which they brought the
entire southern peninsula under their control. Some
of the revenue was also used for the maintenance
of temples and irngation works, They sent tribute
to the king annually and personally appeared in the
royal court with gifts to express their loyalty.
8. Why was the Colenial Government keen on
carrying out regular surveys and mapping
various parts of the country ? Explain.
[4]
OR
Why did Talugdars and Sepoys of Awadh join
the Revolt of 1857 ? Explain.
Answer : Colonial rule was based on the production
of enormous amounts of data. The British kept
detailed records of their trading activities in ordet
to regulate their commercial affairs. To keep track

of life in the growing cities, they carried out regular
surveys, gathered statistical data, and published
various official reports. From the early years, the
colonial government was keen on mapping. Good
maps wete necessary to understand the landscape
and know the topography. This knowledge would
allow better control over the region. When towns
began to grow, maps were prepared not only to plan
the development of these towns but also to develop
commerce and consolidate power. The town maps
give information regarding the location of hills,
rivets and vegetation, all important for planning
structures for defence purposes. They also show the
location of the ghats, density and quality of houses
and alignment of roads, used to gauge commercial

possibilities and plan strategies of taxation.
OR
The annexation by the British not only displaced
the Nawab but also dispossessed the taluqdars of
Awadh. The countryside of Awadh was dotted
with the estates and forts of taluqdars who for
many generations had controlled land and power in
the countryside. Before the coming of the Briush,
talugdars maintained armed retainers, built forts,
and enjoyed a degree of autonomy, as long as they
accepted the suzerainty of the Nawab and paid the
revenue of their taluq. Some of the bigger taluqdars
had as many as 12,000 foot-soldiers and even the
smaller ones had about 200. The British were
unwuling to tolerate the power of the taluqdars.

,

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Immediately after the annexation, the taluqdars were
disarmed and their forts were destroyed.
The sepoys had complained for decades over low
levels of pay and the difficulty of getting a lcave.
In the 1840s, when the sepoys who had a fnendly
relationships with the Botsh officers then began to
change. The officers developed a sense of supenoriry
and started treating the sepoys as their racial inferiors,
riding roughshed over their sensibilities. Abuse and
physical violence became common and thus the
distance between sepoys and officers grew. Trust was
replaced by suspicion. The episode of the greased
cartridges was a classic example of this.
9. “The India in which Gandhiji came back to in
1915 was rather different than the one he had left
in 1893.” Substantiate the statement.
[4]

Answer: In January 1915, Gandhi returned to his
homeland after two decades of residence abroad,
Those years were spent for the most part in South
Africa, where he went as a lawyer, and in ume became
a leader of the Indian community in that territory,
The India that Mahatma Gandhi came back to in
1915 was rather different from the one thar he had
left in 1893. Although still a colony of the British, it
was far more active in a political sense. The Indian
National Congress then had branches in most major
citles and towns. Through the Swadeshi movement

of 1905-07, it had broadened its appeal among the
middle classes. That movement had thrown up
some towering leaders — Bal Gangadhar Tilak of
Maharashtra, Bipin Chandra Pal of Bengal, and Lala
Rajpat Rai of Punjab. The trio was famous as Lal,
Bal and Pal. Where these leaders advocated militant
opposition to colonial rule, there was a group of
‘Moderates’ who preferred a more gradual and
persuasive approach. Among these moderates was

Gandhiji’s acknowledged political mentor, Gopal
Krishna Gokhale, as well as Mohammad Ali Jinnah,
who like Gandhiji, was a lawyer of the Gujarati
extraction trained in London.
PART-C
10. “Buddhism grew rapidly both during the lifetime
of the Buddha and after his death.” Justify the
statement with suitable arguments.
[3]
OR

“Among the best preserved monutnents of the 600
BCE to 600 CE is the Stupa at Sanchi.” Justify the
statement with suitable areuments in the context
of its sculptural features and conservation policy
taken up in the nineteenth century.
Answer : Gautam Buddha founded Buddhism in
the 6th century BCE. The religion became popular

www, cosepdf.com

whload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

+

during the lifetime of Buddha and continue to
spread beyond India after his death. The reason for
the populamty and propagation of Buddhism was its
Message and its simplicity.
People did not find its teachings difficult to
understand. Local language was used by the Sangh to

spread it. In fact, Gautam Buddha used co speak in
the Prakrit language rather than in Sanskrit. Buddha
was apainst any fituals so he did away with them.
People found tt easy to follow this philosophy. Asoka
and later on other kings accepted Buddhism as their
religion, because it was a powerful creed at that time.
Buddha did not believe in caste system and treated
everyone equally which meant the people of
the lower caste were happy. Buddhism attached
importance to conduct and values rather than claims

of superioriry based on birth. They emphasised on
‘meta’ (fellow felling) and ‘karuna’ (compassion)
especially for those who were youger and weaker
than oneself. These ideas drew men and women
to the fold of Buddhism. A bedy of followers of
Buddha was founded in an organizaton known as
Sangha.’ Followers came from many social groups
which included kings, wealthy men gahapatis and
humbler folk.
The teachings of Buddha were written in Tripitakas,
or the Three Baskets. Buddhist Sangha was quick
to spread the message of Buddha to different parts
of India and abroad. Buddhism was opposed to
customs and rituals as was done in Brahmanism.
OR
Stupas were sacred places where the relics of the
Buddha such as his bodily remains or objects used
by him were buried.
According to a Buddhist text known as the
Ashokavadana. Ashoka distributed portions of the
Buddha's relics to every important town and ordered
the construction of stupas over them. By the second
century BCE a number of Stupas, like Sanchi and
others had been built.

Art historians have carefully studied the sculpture
at Sanchi and identified it as a scene from the
Vessantara Jataka.
The empty seat was meant to indicate the meditation
of the Buddha, and the stupa was meant to represent
the Mahaparinirbana. Another frequently used
symbol was the wheel. This stood for the first
sermon of the Buddha, delivered at Sarnath. The

tree symbolises an event in the life of the Buddha.
According to popular belief, Shalabhanyika was a

woman whose touch caused trees to flower and
bear fruit. It is likely that this was regarded as an
auspicious symbol and integrated into the decoration
of the stupa. Animals were after used as symbols of
human attributes. Elephants (signify strength and

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

De

wisdom), horses, monkeys and battle scenes are also
engraved at the stupa.
While some historians identify the figure as Maya,
the mother of the Buddha, others identify her with a
popular goddess, Gajalakshmi—iiterally, the goddess
of good fortune—who is associated with elephants,
Serpent found on several pillars seems to be derived
from other popular traditions.
Conservation policy taken up in the nineteenth

century :
The rulers of Bhopal in the 19th century, Shahjehan
Begum and her successor Sultan Jehan Begum,
provided money for the preservation of the ancient
site, John Marshall dedicated his important volumes
on Sanchi to Sultan Jehan. She funded the museum
and publication of the volumes on Sanchi written
by John Marshall.
French sought ruler Shah Jehan Begum’s permission
to take away the eastern gateway of Sanchi Stupa
but both French and the English were satisfied with

carefully prepared plaster cast copies and the original
remained at the Site.
11. Describe Berniet’s description of land ownership
in India and also describe its influence on

Western theorists from 18th century onwards.

[8]
OR
Desctibe the experiences of Al-Biruni in the
Indian Subcontinent.
Answer : According to Bernier, there was no
private property during Mughal India, He was a
firm believer in the virtues of private property, and
saw crown ownership of land as being harmful

for both the state and its people. He thought that
in the Mughal Empire, the empetor owned all the
land and distributed it among his nobles, and that

this had disastrous consequences for the economy
and society. Owing to crown ownership the land
holders could not pass the property to their children.
They were averse to long term investment in the
sustenance and expansion of production. This had
led to uniform ruination of agriculture.
Bernier's descriptions influenced Western theorists
from the 18th century onwards.

The

French

philosopher Montesquieu, for instance, used this
account to develop the idea of oriental despotism,
according to which rulers in Asia (the Orient or the
East) enjoyed absolute authority over their subjects,
who were kept in conditions of subjugation and
poverty, arguing that al] land belonged to the king and
that private property was non-existent. According to
the above view, everybody, except the emperor and
his nobles, barely managed to survive. This idea was

Www. chsepdf.com

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

further developed as the concept of Asiatic Mode

of Production by Karl Marx in the 19 century. He

atgued that in India and other Asian countries before
colonialism surplus was appropriated by the state.
As in the case of the quesnon of landownership,
Bernier was drawing an oversimplified picture. There
were all kinds of towns : manufacturing towns,
trading towns, port towns, sacted centres, pilgrimage
towns, etc,
OR

Al-Biruni spent years in the company of Brahmana
pnescts and scholars, learning Sanskrit, and studying
relipious and philosophical texts. While his itinerary is
not clear, it is likely that he travelled widely in Punjab
and parts of Northern India,
He also discussed several ‘barriers’ that he felt
obstructed understanding. ‘The first amongst these
was language, Sanskrit was different from Arabic and
Persia. Ideas and concepts could not be translated
from one language into another.
The second barrier he identified was the difference
in religious beliefs and practices. The self-absorption

and consequent insularity of the local population
according to him, constituted the third barrier,

He tted to explain the caste system by looking for
parallels in other societies for example in Ancient
Persia. He attempted to suggest that social drvisions
were not unique to India. He noted that in ancient
Petsia four social categories were recognized. He
remarked that everything which falls into a state a
impurity strives and succeeds in regaining original

condition of putity. The sun cleanses the air, and
the salt in the sea prevents the water from becoming
polluted. Al-Biruni's description of the caste-system
was deeply influence by the Brahamanical point
of view, which in real life was not quite as rigid.
He wrote about the system of Varna, According
to him there were four castes. The highest caste
was Bahamanas who according to the books of
Hindus were created from the head of Brahma
and the Brahman is the only another name for the
force called nature. The next caste was Kshatriyas
who were cteated from the shoulders and hands
of Brahma. The third caste was Vaishya, who were
created from the thigh of Brahma. The fourth caste
was Shudra, were created from the feet of Brahma,

12. Explain the events that led te the communal
politics and Partition of India.
[8]
OR
Explain the strengths and limitations of oral
testimonies in the understanding of Partition
of India.

|

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Answer : The differences between the communal
political parties were creating a divide thar later on
became difficult to bridge. Not only this, the Britsh
government began playing one party against the
other to weaken the national movement and prolong
their stay in India.
(i) Right from the beginning, rhe British followed
the policy of divide and rule. Before the coming of
the British, the Hindus and the Muslims lived happily
in India. There was unity, mutual cooperation and
brotherhood among them.
(ii) To weaken the National Movement, the
povernment actively encouraged the Muslim League
to follow their communal demands, In fact, they got
some Muslim leaders to form the League in 1905,
after the Partition of Bengal. Also the League's
proposal for a coalition government in the united
provinces was rejected by the Congress after the
provincial election of 1937.
(iii) The role of the political leaders was also
responsible for the partition of India. Prominent
among them was Jinnah, who lead the Muslim
League and passed the Lahore Resolution demanding
a measute of autonomy for the Muslim majority
areas that gave birth to a new nation called Pakistan.
(iv) During the 1920s and carly 1930s tension grew
around a number of issues. Muslims were angered
by ‘music-before-mosque’, by the cow protection
movement formation of the Hindu Mahasabha in
1915 and by the efforts of the Arya Samaj to bring
back to the Hindu fold (shuddhi) those who had
recently converted to Islam.
(v) Hindus were angered by the rapid spread of
tabligh (propaganda) and tanzim (organisation)
after 1923,
(vi) Post War Developments : During 1945 the
British agreed to create an entirely Indian Central
Executive Council except for the Viceroy and the
Commander-in-Chief

of the armed

forces, as a

preliminary step towards full independence.
Discussions about the transfer of power broke
down due to Jinnah's unrelenting demand that
the League had dn absolute right to choose all the
Muslim members oif the Executive Council and
that there should be a kind of communal veto in
the Council.
(vii) Failure of the Cabinet : Mission (March
1946) was short lived as the Muslim League wanted

Www.ecbsepdf.com

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

the grouping to be compulsory, with sections B and
C developing into strong entities with the right to
secede from the Union in the future.
(viii) Direct Action Day : After withdrawing its
support to the Cabinet Mission plan, the Muslim
League decided on “Direct Action’ for winning its
demand for Pakistan, It announced on 16 August
1946 as Direct Action Day, On this day, riots broke
out in Calcutta, lasting several days and leaving
several thousand people dead. By Mrch 1947
violence spread to many parts of Northern [ndia.
(ix) Withdrawal of law and order from 1946 to
1947 ; There was a complete breakdown orf authority
in the city of Amritsar British officials did not know
how to handle ths situation : they were unwilling
to take decisions, and hesitant to intervene. When

panic-stricken people appealed for help, British
officials asked them toi contact Mahatma Gandhi,
Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallabh Bhai Pate] or M. A.
Jinnah. Nobody knew who could exercise authority

and power. The top leadership of the Indian
parties, barring Mahatma Gandhi, were involved in
Ncgotiations regarding independence while many

Indian civil servants in the affected provinces feared
for their own Irves and property. The British were
busy prepanne to quit India,
(x) Compounded

Problems

: Problems

compounded because Indian soldiers and policemen
came to act as Hindus, Muslims or Sihks. As
communal tension mounted, the professional
commitment of those in uniform could not be relied
upon. In many places not only did policemen help

their co-religionists but they also attacked members
of other communities.

OR

The strengths of oral tesamonies in the understanding
of Partition of India:
(i) Oral history helps us grasp experiences and
memotics in detail.
(ii) It enables historians to write richly textured,
vivid accounts of what happened to people during
events such as Partition which would be impossible
to extract this kind of information from povernmcat
documents.
(iii) It also allows historians to broaden the
boundaries of their discipline about the lived
experiences of the poor and the powerless. For
cxample, about Latf’s father, the women of Thoa
Khala.

(iv) Moving beyond the actions of the well-off and
the well-known, the oral history of Partition has
succeeded in exploring the experiences of those men

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE

2019 History Solved Paper

Da

and women that were ignored, taken for granted, or
mentioned only in passing in mainstream history.
(v)

Oral narratives memoirs, diaries, family histories

first hand
trials and
paritinon
shape the

written accounts help to understand the
tribulation of ordinary people during the
of the country, Memories and experiences
reality of an event.

Oral testimonies tell us about the day to day
experiences of those affected by the government

decision to divide the country.
The limitations of oral testimonies in the understanding of Partition of India :
(i) Many historians believed that oral data seem
to lack concreteness and the chronology they
yield may have be imprecise. Historians argue
that the uniqueness of personal experience makes
generalisation difficult: a large picture cannot be
built from such micro-evidence, and one witness is
no witness.
(ii) They also think that oral accounts
are concerned
with tangential issues, and that the small individual

experiences which remain in memory are irrelevant
to the unfolding of larger processes of history.
(iii) If history has to accord presence to the
ordinary and powerless, then the oral history of
Partition is not concerned with tangential matters.
(iv) The experiences it relates arc central
to the story,
so much so that oral sources should be used to check
other sources and vice versa.
PART-D
13. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
Prabhavati Gupta and the village
of Danguna.
This

is what

Prabhavati

Gupta

states

in her

inscription :
Prabhavati Gupwa ....... commands the gramakutumbinas
(householders/peasants living in the village),
Brahmanas and others living in the village of
Danguna...
“Be it known to you that on the twelfth (lunar day)
of the bright (fortnight) of Karttika, we have, in

order to increase our religious merit donated this
village with the pouring out of water, to the Acharya
(teacher) Chanalasvamin.... You should obey all (his)

We confer on (him) the following exemptions typical
of an agrabara.... (this village is) not to be entered
by soldiers and policeman; (it is) exempt from (the
obligation to provide) grass, (animal) hides as seats,
and charcoal (to touring royal officers); exermpt from
(the royal prerogative of) purchasing fermenting

www..cbsepdf.com

winload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

liquor and digging (salt); exempt from (the right to)
mines and Abadia trees; exempt from (the obligation
to supply) flowers and milk; (it is donated) together
with (the right to) hidden treasures and deposits (and)
together with major and minor taxes.....”
This charger has been written in the thirteenth
(repnal) year. (It has been) engraved by Chakradasa.
(13.1)
How did Prabhavati Gupta show her
authority through the inscription ? [2]
(13.2) How did the inscription pive us an idea
about the rural population ?
[2]
(13.3) Examine the importance of the charter
issued by Prabhavati Gupta.
[3]
Answer : (13.1) Her authority is reflected in the
language used in the inscription,
(13.2) The inscription gives us information about
the rural population as the inscription addresses
the ‘householders/peasants living in the village,
the Brahmanas and others living in the village of
Danguna.’
(13.3) Charter was a command or order for all living
in village and they had to obey the commands.
It provides insight into the relationship between
cultivators and the state. It also gives an idea
about rural population who were expected to
provide a range of produce to the king and his
representatives.
14. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
Nobles at Court

The Jesuit Priest Father Antonio Monserrate, resident
at the court of Akbar, noticed:

In order to prevent the preat nobles becoming
insolent through the unchallenged enjoyment of
power, the King summons them to court and gives
them imperious commands, as though they were his
slaves. The obedience to these commands ill suits
their exalted rank and dignity.
(14.1)
Examine the relationship between
Akbar and his nobles.
[2]
(14.2)
How do you think that the nobility
was an important pillar of the Mughal
State ?
[2]
(14.3)
Explain the observation of the Jesuit
Priest Father Antonio Monserrate
regarding this relationship.
[3]
Answer: (14.1) The king would summon the nobles
to the court and give them unperial commands as
though they were his slaves. This was to prevent
the great nobles from becoming insolent through
unchallenged enjoyment of power. The king pranted
titles to men of merit; awards were also piven.

(14.2) The nobility was an important pillar of the
Mughal state as they were recruited from diverse

}

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Do

ethnic and religious groups to aid in effective
administranon. The nobles participated in military
campaigns with their armies and also served as
officers of the empire in the provinces.
(14.3) The Jesuit Pnest Father Antonio Monserrate
observe that the members of the fesuit mission
interpreted the emperor's open interest in the
doctrines of Chnistianty as a sign of his acceptance
of their faith, This could be understood in relation
to the intolerant religious atmosphere that existed 1n
Europe at the time. High respect shown by Akbar
towards the members of the Jesuit mission impresed
them deeply.
15. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow ;
Buchanan on the Santhals
Buchanan wrote ;
They are very clever in clearing new lands, but live
meanly. Their huts have no fence, and the walls are
made of small sticks placed upright, close together

and plastered within with clay. They are small and
slovenly, and too flat-roofed, with very little arch.
(15.1)
Examine the role of Buchanan as an
agent of the East India Company ? [2]
(15.2) Analyse the economic activities of
Santhals.
[2]
(15.3)
How did Buchanan describe the living
conditions of Santhals ?
[3]
OR
;
Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
How debts mounted
In a petition to the Deccan Riots Commission a ryot
explained how the system of loans worked :
A sowkart lends his debtor ¥ 100 on bond at ¥ 3-2
annas per cent pet mensem. The latter agrees to pay
the amount within eight days from the passing of the
bond. Three years after the stipulated time for repaying
the amount, the sewé&ar takes from his debtor another

bond for the principal and interest together at the

same rate of interest, and allows him 125 days’ ume
to liquidate the debt. After the lapse of 3 years and
15 days a third bond is passed by the debtor .... (this
process is repeated) at end of 12 years .... his interest

on @ 1,000 amounts to ¥ 2,028-10 annas-3 paise.
(15.1)

For what purpose did ryots get loans
from money lenders ?
[2]
(15.2)
How did the ryot explain the system of
loans ?
[2]
(15.3)
How do you think that the way of
borrowing money by the ryots brought
misery to them ?
[3]
Answer : Buchanan on that Santhals :
(15.1) Buchanan was employed by the East India
Company. He marched everywhere with a large
army of people—draughtsmen, surveyors, palanquin
bearers, coolies, etc. As an agent of the East India

www. cbsepdf.cam

whload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

Company, Buchanan had to teport on the activity
of the Santhals,
(15.2) (i) The Santhals cultivated a range of
commercial crops for the market.
(ii) The dealt with traders and moneylenders as
well,
(15.3) Accordingto Buchanan, the Santhals had very
little needs, They lived in simple huts made-up of
small sticks and plastered with mud. The design of
the huts was simple with flat roofs and no arches,
The huts were built small and dishevelled. They had
no fence.

OR
How debts mounted

(15.1) They needed loans even to buy their everyday

needs and meet their production expenditure.
Cultivators required loans for extending their
average, mOving into new areas, and transforming
pasture land into cultivated fields. But to expand
culnvation peasants needed more ploughts and cattle.
They needed money to buy seeds and land. For this
they had to turn to the moneylenders for loans.
(15.2) The sowkar (sahukar) lends his debtor
Rs, 100 on bondat Rs, 3-2 annas per cent per mensem.
The latter agrees to pay the amount within eight days
from the passing of the bond. Three years after the

stipulated time for repaying the amount, the sowkar
takes from his debtor another bond for the principal
and interest together at the same rate of interest, and
allows him a period of 125 days to liquidate the debt.

After
the lapse of 3 years and 15 days, a third bond is
passed by the debtor, This process is repeated at the
end of 12 years and his interest on Rs. 1000 amounts
to Rs, 2028-10 annas—3 paise.
(15.3) Over time, the ryots and peasants came to
associate the misery of their lives with the new
regime of bonds and deeds. They were made to
sign and put thumb impressions on documents, but
they did not know what they were actually signing,
They had no idea of the clauses that moneylenders
inserted in the bonds. They feared the written word.
But they had no choice because to survive they
needed loans, and moneylenders were unwilling to
give loans without legal bonds.
PART-E
16. (16.1) On the given political outline map of India,
locate and label the following appropriately :
[i x 2=2]
(a) Dandi—a centre of national movement.
OR
Masulipatnam-a city under British control in
1857,
(b} Panipat—a territory under Mughals,
OR
Delhi

P

No OTP

No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

De

(16.2) On the same political outline map of
India, three places have been marked as A, B
and C which are related to matured Harappan

oot
“

a

er

Answer:

wivw.cbsepdf.com

f

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From wiww.cbsepdf.cam

sites. Identify them and write their correct names
on the lines drawn near them.
f1x3=3]

——

Panipat 16 1 (b) or
Delhi 16.1

—a

9)
he,

|

(b

Me
a

re

°

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Oc

History 2019 (Outside Delhi)
Time allowed

: 3 hours

Note : Except for the following questions, ali the
remaining questions have been asked in previous
set,

PART-A
17.

“Over the decades, new issues have assumed

importance in the archaeology of Harappa.”
Give two evidences to justify the statement. [2]
Answer : Over the decades, new issues have assumed

importance in the archaeology of Harappa. Where
some archaeologists are often keen to obtain a
cultural sequence, others try to understand the
logic underlying the location of specific sites. They
also grapple with the wealth of artefacts, trying to
fipute out the functions these may have served.
Specialists are using modern scientific techniques
including surface exploration to recover traces of the
civilization as well to minutely analyse every scrap
of available evidence.
18. State any two features of Akbar Nama.
[2]
Answer : (i) The author of Akbar Nama(the

chronicle of a King), Abu’l Fazl who was a court
historian in the reign of Akbar. The Mughal
chronicle is based on a range of sources including
actual records of events, official documents and oral

testimonies of knowledgeable person.
(ii) The Akbar Nama is divided into three books of
which the first two are chronicles and the third book
is the Ain-i-Akbari. The Akbar Nama provides a
detailed description of Akbar’s reign in the traditional
diachronic sense of recording politically sipnificant
events as well as synchronic picture of all aspects of
Akbar’s empire—geographic social administrative and
culmral without reference to chronology.
PART-B
19. “Many reconstructions of Harappan religion
are made on assumptions and archaeological
interpretation.” Substantiate the statement. [4]
Answer : (i) Early archaeologists thought that certain
objects which seemed unusual or unfamiliar may
have had a religious significance. These included
terracotta figurines of women, heavily jewelled some
with elaborate head-dresses, regarded as mother
goddesses.
(ii) Rare stone statutory of men in an almost

standardised posture, seated with one hand on the
knee such as ‘priest king’ was also similarly classified.
(iii) Same structures have been assigned of ritual
significance which include preat bath and fire altars
found at Kalibangan and Lothal.

wae. chsepdf.com

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.caom

SET II
Maximum marks
; 80

(iv) Attempts have also been made to reconstruct
religious beliefs and practices by examining seals,
some of which seem to depict ritual scenes. Others,

with plant motifs, are thought to indicate nature
worship. Some animals — such as the one-horned
animal, often called the ‘unicorn — depicted on
seals seem to be mythical, composite creatures. In
some seals, a figure shown scated cross-legged in a
yogic posture, sometimes surrounded by animals,

has been regarded as a depiction of ‘proto-Shiva’,
that is, an early form of one of the major deities of
Hinduism. Besides, conical stone objects have been
classified as lingas.
20. Describe the beliefs of Virashaiva tradition in
Karnataka.
[4]
Answer : The Virashaivas or Lingayats worship
Shiva in his manifestation as a linga, and men
usually wear a small linga in a silver case on a
loop strung over the left shoulder. Those who are
revered include the jangama or wandering monks.
Lingayats believe that on death the devotee will be
united with Shiva and will not return to this world.
Therefore, they do not practise funerary rites such
as cremation, prescribed in the Dharamashastras.
Instead, they ceremonially bury their dead. They
challenged the idea of caste and the “pollution”
attributed to certain groups by the Brahamanas. They
questioned the theory of rebirth. These won them
followers amongst those who were marginalised by
the Brahamanical social order. The Lingayats also
encouraged certain practices that were disapproved
in the Dharmshastras, such as post-puberty marriage
and the remarriage of widows. The understanding
of
Virashaiva tradition is dertved from Vachanas (oral
sayings) composed in Kannada by women and men
who joined the movement,
21. “The initiatives in Champaran, Ahmedabad and
Kheda marked Gandhiji out as a nationalist with
a deep sympathy for the poor.” Substantiate the
statement,
[4]
Answer : Gandhiji in the last month of the year
1916 was presented with an opportunity to put his
precepts into practice. At the annual Congress held
in Lucknow, Gandhiji was approached by a peasant
from Champaran in Bhar, who told about the harsh

}

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

Do

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

treatment by the British indigo planters. After this
information, Mahatma Gandhi had to spend much
of 1917 in Champatan, seeking to obtain freedom
for the peasants, security of tenure as well as the
freedom to cultivate the crops of their choice.
The following year, 1918, Gandhiji was involved in
two campaipns in his home state of Gujarat. First,
he intervened better working conditions for the
textile mill workers in Ahmedabad. Then he joined
the peasants in Kheda, in asking the state for the
remission of taxes following the fatlure of their
harvest. These initiatives in Champaran, Ahmedbad
and Kheda marked Gandhiji out as a nationalist with
a deep sympathy for the poor.
PART-C
22. Describe the perspective of Ibn Battuta and
Francois Bernier on the condition of women in
the Indian subcontinent.

[8]

OR
Describe Bernier’s views on the land-ownership
of Mughals.
Answer : Ibn Battuta’s account, Ribla, states that
female slaves were in the service of the Sultan who
were experts in music and dance.
Ibn Battuta himself enjoyed their performances
at the wedding of the Sultan's sister. Female slaves
were also employed by the Sultan to keep a watch
on his nobles.

They entered the house unannounced, They
communicate all the information to the Sultan. They
wete captured in raids and expedition. They were

History 2019 (Outside Delhi)
Time allowed

: 3 hours

Note : Except for the following questions, ali the
remaining questions have been asked in previous
set.
PART-A
23. State the role of Jati Panchayats in the Mughal
aptatian society.
[2]
Answer : Panchayats had a very important role
during the Mughal agrarian society. In addition to
the village panchayat, each caste or jati in the village
had its own Jatt Panchayat. These panchayats wielded
considerable power in rural society. They mediated in
contested claims on lands, decided whether marnages
were performed according to the norms Jaid down
by a particular caste group, determined who had
rituals precedence in village functions, and so on.

www.cbsepdf.com

1

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From wwaw.cbsepdf.com

openly sold in markets, like any other commodity
and were also piven as gifts.
Beriner highlighted the ill treatment of women in
India,
He described the practice of Sau. He chose his
practice as a crucial marker of difference between
Western and Eastern societies.
OR
Bernier’s description of land ownership of Mughals :
(i) Berniers said that there was no private property
during Mughal India.
{ii) He believed in virtues of private property.
(iii) He saw crown ownership as harmful for both
state and the people.
(iv) He thought Mughal emperors owned the entire
land,
(v) This had disastrous consequences for the state
and society.
(vi) Owing to crown ownership the land holders
could not pass the property to their childten.
(vii) They were averse to long term investment in
the sustenance and expansion of production.
(vii) This had led to uniform ruination of
apriculture.
(ix) The French philosopher Montesquicu used this

account to develop the idea of oriental despotism
according to which rulers in Asia (the Orient or the
East) enjoyed absolute authority over their subjects
who were kept in conditions of subjugation and
poverty arguing that all land belonged
to the king
and the private property was nonexistent,

SET III
Maximum marks

: 80

The state respected the decisions of Jati Panchayats
in most of the cases.
PART-B
24. “One of the most distinctive features of
Harappan cities was the carefully planned
drainage system.” Substantiate the statement.

[4]
Answer : One of the most distinctive features of
Harappan cities was the carefully planned drainage
system. At the Lower Town, the roads and streets
were laid out along an appfoximate prid pattern,
intersecting at right angles. It seems that streets with
drains were laid out first and then houses were built
along them. If domestic waste water had to flow
into the street drains, every house needed to have at

Q

No OTP

No Login No Adversitement

CBSE

2019 History Solved Paper

least one wall along the street. It is certainly the most

complete ancient system as yet discovered.
25. Describe the distinctive aspects of Sufi-Sulsila.

[4]
Answer : By the eleventh century Sufism evolved
into a well-developed movement with a body of
literature on Quranic studies and Sufi practices, Sufi
Sisilas began to crystallise in different parts of the
Islamic world around the twelfth century. The word
silsila literally means a chain, signifyinga continuous
link between master and discipline, stretching
as unbroken spiritual genealogy to the Prophet
Muhammad, It was important as it was through
this channel that spirimal power and blessing were
transmitted to devotees. Special nial of invitation
were developed in which initiates took an oath of
allegiance, wore a patched garment, and shaved
their hair. Dargah (tomb-shrine) became centre of
devotion fopr shaikhs followers. The most famous
Sufi Silsila was “Chisti Silsila”.
26. “It was the Rowlatt Satyagraha that made
Gandhiji a truly national leader.” Substantiate
[4]

the staternent.

Answer: In 1919, Gandhiji pave a call for Satyagraha
against the Rowlatt Act, passed by the British.
The Act restricted the freedom of expression and
strenpthened police powers. It was the Rowlatt
Satyagraha that made Gandhiji a true national leader.
Encouraged by its success, Gandhiji called for a
campaign of Non-Cooperation with Brisb rule.
Indians who wished colonialism to end were asked
to stop attending schools, colleges and law courts,
and not pay taxes. In sum, they were asked
to adhere
to a ‘renunciation of (all) voluntary association with
the (British) Government’. Gandhiji said that if
non-cooperation was effectively carried out, India
would win swaraj within a year. To further broaden
the struggle, he had joined hands with Khilafat
Movement.
27. Describe

Ibn Battuta’s account

cities,

of Indian

|,

BI

OR
Describe the detailed observations and critical
insights given in the Bernier’s “Travels in the

Mughal Empire”.
Answer ; As a traveller, [bn Battuta found cities in
the subcontinent full of exciting opportunities. He
arrived in Delhi in the fourteenth century when it

was a part of global network They were densely
populated and prosperous, except for che occasional

www. cbsepdf.com

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

disruptions caused by wars and invasions. From
Ibn Battuta’s account it appears that most cities had
crowded streets and bright and colourful markets
that were stacked with a wide variety of goods. He

describes Delhi as a vast city, with a great population,
the largest in India. Daulatabad was equal in size of
Delhi. The bazaars were not only places of economic
transactions, but the hub of social and cultural

activities. Most bazaars had a mosque and a temple
and spaces were marked for public performances
by dancers, musicians and singers. He found Indian
agriculture very productive because of the fertility
:
of soil.
OR
Bernier’s “The Travels in the Mughal Empire’ is
marked by detailed observations, critical insights
and reflection.
(i) According to Bernier, there was no private
property during Mughal India. He was a firm believer
in the virtues of private property, and saw crown
ownership of land as being harmful for both the state
and its people. He thought that the emperor owned
all the land and distributed it among his nobles, and
this had disastrous consequences for the economy
and society.
(ii) Owing to crown ownership of land, landholders
could not pass on their land to their children. So
they were abverse to any long-term investment in
the sustenance and expansion of production. It had
led to the uniform ruination of agriculture, excessive
oppression of the peasantry and a continuous decline
in the living standards of all sections of society,
except the ruling aristocracy.
(iii) Bernier’s descriptions influenced Western
theorists from the eighteenth century onwards. The
French philosopher Montesquieu, for instance,
used this account to develop the idea of oriental
despotism, according to which mulers in Asia (the
Orient or the East) enjoyed absolute authority
over their subjects, who were kept in conditions
of subjugation and poverty, arguing that all land
belonged to the king and that private property was
non-existent.
(iv) According to this view, everybody, except the

emperor and his nobles, barely managed to survive.
This idea was further developed as the concept
of the Asiatic mode of production by Karl Marx
in the nineteenth century. He argued that in India
{and other Asian countries), before colonialism,

surplus was appropriated by the stare. This led to the
emergence of a society that was composed of a large
number of autonomous and (internally) egalitarian
village communities.

.

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

Do

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

(v) The imperial court presided over these village
communities, tespecting their autonomy as long
as the flow of surplus was unimpeded. This was
reparded as a stagnant system.
(vi) Contemporary European travellers and writers
often highlighted the treatment of women as a

History 2019 (Delhi)
Time allowed

: 3 hours

PART-A
28. “Inscriptional evidence has its own limitations
while reconstructing history.” Justify the
statement giving two points.
[2]
Answer ; The limitations are :
(i) Sometmes the words engraved are very faint
hence it very difficult to decipher them.
(ii) It is not easy to find out the real meaning of
the words used in the inscnption. Sometimes the
facts stated are in relevance to a patticular situation
or ime.

29. Why was Rihla called a remarkable book of Ibn
Battuta ? Give two reasons.
[2]
Answer : Rihla was called a remarkable book of Ibn
Battuta because :
(i} It provides rich details about the social and
cultural life of the fourteenth century, in the Indian
subcontinent.
(ii) It provides an extensrve scholarly account of his
travel expeditions across various countries Itke Syria,
Iraq, Persia, Yemen, Oman, India and a few trading
ports on the coast of East Africa.
30. State any two characteristic features of the towns
built by the Mughals in India during sixteenth
[2]
and seventeenth centuries.
OR
State any two characteristic features of the ‘new
Black Town’ developed during the colonial
period in Madras.
Answer : During the sixteenth and seventeenth

centuries, the towns built by the Mughals were
famous for their concentration of populations, their
monumental buildings and their imperial grandeur
and wealth. They were centres for the production
of exclusive handicrafts for the king and the
nobles. These towns had mosques, tombs, gardens,
bazars etc, They were centtes for the production of
exclusive handictafts for the king and the nobles.
These towns had mosques, tombs, gardens, bazars
etc, Agra, Delhi and Lahore were important centres
of imperial administration and control.

www.cbsepdf.com

inload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

crucial marker of difference between Western and

Eastern societes. Not surprisingly, Bernier chose
the practice of Sati for detailed description. He
noted that while women seemed to embrace death
cheerfully, others were forced to die.

SET I
Maximum marks : 80

OR
(i) The new Black Town resembled traditional
Indian towns, with living quarters built around its
own temple and bazaar. On the narrow lanes that
criss-crossed the township. There were distinct castespecific neighbourhoods.
(ii) Chintadripet was an area meant for weavers.

Washermanpet was a colony of dyers and bleachers
of cloth. Royapuram was a settlement for Chnsnan
boatmen who worked for the Company.
PART-B
31. Prove with the help of examples that the
Harappans had established their contacts
with Western Asia for purchase/exchange of

artifacts.

[4]

Answer : The Harappans had established their
contacts with Western Asia for the purchase and
exchange of artifacts. Here are some examples :
(i) Recent archaeological finds indicate that copper
was probably brought from Oman, situated on the
southeastern tip of the Arabian peninsula.
(ii) Chemical analyses have shown that both the
Omani copper and Harappan artefacts have traces
of nickel, suggesting a common ofigin.
(iii) A distinctive type of vessel, a large Hatappan
jat coated with a thick layer of black clay has been
found at sites in Oman. Such thick coatings prevent
the percolation of liquids. It is possible that the
Harappans exchanged the contents of these vessels
for Omani copper.
(iv) Mesopotamian texts mention contact with
regions named Dilmun (probably the island
of Bahrain), Magan and Meluhha, possibly the
Harappan region. They mention the products from
Meluhha: carnehan, lapis lazuli, copper, gold, and
varieties of wood.
32. Describe the sources historians have used
to reconstruct the history of the Mauryan

Empire.
[4]
Answer : Historians have used many sources to
reconstruct the history of the Mauryan Empire.

2

No OTP No Login No Adversiiement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

D

(i) The archaeological finds like sculptures.
(ii) Valuable contemporary work such as
Magasthene’s Indica who was a Greek ambassador
to the court of Chandragupta Maurya.
(iii) The book of Arthashastra, parts of which were
probably composed by Kautilya or Chanakya.
33. “The Virupaksha Temple developed as significant
atchitectural religious and cultural centre.’
Explain the statement with suitable examples.

[4]
Answer : The Virupaksha temple is believed to have
built over centuries, The temple 1s dedicated to Lord
Shiva, the guardian deity.
(i) The earliest shrine that dated to the ninth to
tenth centuries, was substantially enlarged with the
establishment of the Vijayanagara Empire.
(ii) The hall in front of the main shrine was built by
Kushnadeva Raya to mark his accession. This was
decorated with delicately carved pillars.
(tii) The halls in the temple were used for a variety
of purposes. Some were spaces in which the images
of gods were placed to witness special programmes
of music, dance, drama, etc. Others were used to

celebrate the marriages of deities, and yet others
were meant for the deities to swing in.
(iv) From the point of view of the rulers,

constructing, repairing and maintaining temples
were important means of winning support and
recognition for their power, wealth and piety.
(v) The temple also functioned as a centre for

learning. The rulers and others often granted land
and other resources for the maintenance of temples.
(vi) Structures of
been a mark of
exemplified by the
that often dwarfed

immense scale that must have
impcrial authority, werc best
raya gopurams or royal gateways
the towers on the central shrines,

and signalled the presence of the temple from a
great distance. Other distinctive features include
mandapasor pavilions and long, pillared corridors.
34. “Akbar consciously made Persian the leading
language of the Mughal Court.” Justify the
statement with the efforts made by him.
[4]
OR
“The visible centre of Mughal power was the
King's Court.” Justify the statement with suitable
afpuments.
Answer : The Mughal had cultural and intellectual
contacts with Iran. Persian was used in the Court
of Iran. The Iranians and Central Asian migrants

sought positions in the Mughal Courts.
(i) Persian was elevated to a language of cmpite,

conferring power and prestige on those who had a

www.cbsepdf.com

1

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

«

command of it. It was spoken by the king, the royal
household and the elite at court.
(ii) It became the language of administration at
all levels so that accountants, clerks and other
functionaries also learnt it.
(iii) Even when Persian was not directly used, tts
vocabulary and idiom heavily influenced the language

of official records in Rajasthan and Marathi and
even Tamil urdu sprang from Persian and Persian

too became Indianised by absorbing local idioms.
(iv) Mughal chronicles such as the ‘Akbar Nama’ were
written in Persian, others, like Babur’s memoirs, were
translated from the Turkish into the Persian “Babur
Nama’. Translanons of Sansknt texts such as the

Mahabharata and the Ramayana into Persian were
commussioned by the Mughal emperors.
OR
The visible centre of Mughal power was the court.
Political alliances and relationships were forged
and status and hierarchies were well defined. The

political system devised by the Mughals was based
on a combination of military power and conscious
policy to accommodate the different traditions they
encountered in the subcontinent.
The physical arrangement of the court, focused on
he sovereign and mirrored his status as the heart
of society. Its centrepiece was therefore the chrone

or the ‘takht’, known as ‘Axis Mundi’. The canopy
on the throne was the symbol of kingship, Specific
places were assigned to courtiers according to

their importance in the eyes of the emperor in the
Mughal Court. No one was allowed to move from
his allocated position without permission. Forms of
address, courtesies and speech were specified. Any
violation was punished. Forms of salutanon indicated
a person's status in the hierarchy, Protocols were to
be strictly followed by the envoys.

The empeor began his day at sunrise with personal
religious devotions or prayers, and then appeared ona
small balcony
— the ‘jharoka’, facing the east. Below,
a crowd of people (soldiers, merchants, craftspersons,
peasants, women with sick children) waited for a
view ot ‘darshan’, of the emperor. Afterwards the
emperor walked to the public hall of audience or
the ‘diwan-1-am' to conduct the primary business of
his government. Then he was in the “drwan-1 khas'
to hold private audiences and discuss confidential
matters.

Special ‘occasions and festvals were celebrated in the
Court. Titles were pranted to men of merit.
Awards and pifts were given by the king to nobles
and others in the Court.
The courtiers visited the King empty handed. The
king negotiated with the ambassadors of different

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

countrics

in the

Court.

Do

Mansabdars

were

an

important part of the Mughal Court.
35. Analyse the impact of American Civil War on the
lives of the Ryots in Deccan country-side. [4]
OR
Examine why were the religious divisions
between Hindus and Muslims hardly noticeable
during the uprising of 1857.
Answer : The American Civil War affected the lives
of tvots in following ways :
(i) Britain was heavily dependent on Amenica for its
supply of raw cotton. To reduce this dependency they
were always on the lookout for alternative sources
of supply.
(ii) For this purpose they established the Cotton
Supply Association in 1857 and the Manchester
Corton Company in 1859. The objective of both
was to encourage cotton production in all parts of
the world especially India.
(iti) When the American Civil War broke out,

supply of cotton to Britain drastically dropped.
Frantic messages were sent to India and elsewhere
increase cotton exports to Bntain. Consequently,
merchants gave advances to urban sahukars who in

turn extended credit to rural moneylenders to acquire
more cotton.
(iv) While the American crisis continued, cotton
production in the Bombay Deccan expanded.
Between 1860 and 1864 cotton acreage doubled. By
1862 over 90 per cent of cotton imports into Britain
were coming from India. But these boom years did
not bring prosperity to all cotton producers. Some
rich peasants did gain, but for the large majority,
cotton expansion meant heavier debt.
(vy) The moneylenders made the lives of ryots
miserable. The ryots came to see the moneylenders
as devious and deceitful. The moneylenders were
violating the customary norms of the countryside.
The credit flow to the ryots was stopped
after the civil
war. Many ryots lost their lands, homes and resources
to the moneylender.
OR
It was remarkable that the uprising religious divisions
between Hindus and Muslims were hardly nouceable
despite British attempts to create such divisions.

The rebel proclamations in 1857
to all sections of the population,
caste and creed. Many of the
issued by Muslim princes or

repeatedly appealed
irrespective of their
proclamations were
in their names but

even these took care to address
Hindus. The rebellion was seen
both Hindus and Muslims had
gain. The ishtahars harked back

wiwwecbsepdf.caom

the sentments of
as a war in which
cqually to lose or
to the pre-Bntish

vnioad All Previous Year and Sample Papers From wwww.cbsepdf.com

+

fF

Hindu-Muslim past and glorified the coexistence of
different communities under the Mughal Empire,
The proclamation that was issued under the name
of Bahadur Shah appealed to the people to join the
fight uoder the standards of both Muhammad and
Mahavir. In Bareilly in Western Uttar Pradesh, in
December 1857, the British spent ¥ 50,000 to incite
the Hindu population against the Muslims. However,
the attempt failed.
36. Why did B, Pocker Bahadur
from Madras make a
powerful plea for continuing separate electorate
in the Constituent Assembly ? Explain.
[4]
Answer: Minontes exist in all lands, argued Bahadur,
they could not be wished away, they could not be
erased out of existence. The need was to create

a political fabne in which minorities could live in
harmony with others, and the differences between
communities could be minimised. This was possible
only if minorites were well represented within the
political system, their voices heard, and their views
taken into account. The needs of the Muslims could
not be understood by Non-Muslims. Therefore he

demanded separate Electorate for Muslims.
PART-C
37. Describe the ‘Ideal of Patriliny’ and ‘Gendered
access to Property prevailing during sixth
century B.C.E, to sixth century C.E. [4+4=8]
OR
Describe the elements considered by historians
to analyse Mahabharata. State the efforts of VS.

Suthankar and his team for the preparation of
the critical edition of Mahabharata,
Answer : (i) The Ideal of Patriliny : The
Mahabharata stands exemplary when it comes to
the idea of Patriliny. The feud between the Kauravas
and the Pandavas, ultimately ended in a battle, in
which the Pandavas emerged victorious. After that,
patrilineal succession was proclaimed. While patriliny
had existed pnor to the composition of the epic, the
central story of the Mahabharata reinforced the idea
that it was valuable. Under patriliny, son could claim
the resources (including the throne in the case of
kines) of their father’s when the latter died.
Most ruling dynasttcs (c. sexth century BCE onwards)
claimed to follow this system, although there were
variations in practice: Sometimes there were no
sons in some situations and brothers succeeded
one another, sometimes other kinsmen claimed
the throne, and, in very exceptional circumstances,

women such as Prabhavati Gupta exercised power.
It is evident in situal texts such as the Rigveda.
(ii) Gendered access to Property ; The paternal
estate was to be divided equally amongst sons after

4

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Di

the death of the parents, with a special share for
the eldest. Women could not claim a share of these
resources. However, women were allowed to retain
the gifts they recetved on the occasion of their
marriage as ‘stridhana’ (litcrally, a woman's wealth).
This could be inherited by their children, without the

husband having any claim on it. Prabhavad Gupta was
an exception when a woman claimed the resources
of her father. At the samc time, the Manusmrin
warned women agamst hoarding family property,
or even their own valuables, without the husband’s
permission. However, cumulative evidence — both
epigraphic and textual — sugpests that while upperclass women may have had access to resoutces; the
land, cattle and money were penerally conttolled by
men. Women acquired wealth during the ritual of
marriage, bridal processions as a token of affection
from her brother, mother or father or as a pift from
her husband. In other words, social differences
between men and women were sharpened because
of the differences in access to resources.
OR
Historians considered several elements to analyse
the Mahabharata:
(i) Language and content ; The Mahabharata is
written in Sanskrit. However, the Sanskrit used in the
Mahabharata is far simpler than that of the Vedas, or
of the prashastis, Therefore, it was probably widely
understood.
Historians usually classify the contents of the present
text under two broad heads — sections that contain
stories, desipnated as the narrative, and sections that

contain prescriptions about social norms, designated
as didactic. This division is by no means watertight —
the didactic sections include stories, and the narrative
often contains a social message. The historians give
considerations to the kind of texts-whether meant
for chanting rituals or telling stories. They find out

the author and the ideas that shaped the text. They
study the intended audience for the text. They
find out the possible date of the text. They find
out the place where the text was composed. They
study thc content of the text and understand theis

historical significance. The historians agree that the
Mahabharata was meant to be dramatic.
(ii) Author(s) and dates : The orginal story was
probably composed by chanoteer-bards known a:
sutas who generally accompanied Kshatriya warnor:
to the battlefield and composed poems celebrating
their victories and other achievernents. Then frorr

the fifth century BCE, the Brahmanas took over the
story and began to commit it to writing,
During the period of c. 200 and 400 CE, larg:
didactic sections resembling the Manusmriti wer

www. chsepdf.caom

1

whload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

added. With these additions, a text which initially

perhaps had less than 10,000 verses grew to comprise
about 100,000 verses. This enormous composition
is traditionally attributed to a sage named Vyasa,
One of the most ambitious projects of scholarship
began in 1919, under the leadership of a noted Indian

Sanskntst, V.S. Sukthankar. A team comprising
dozens of scholars ininated the task of preparing a
critical edition of the Mahabharata.
1. Initially, it meant collecting Sansknt manuscripts
of the text, written in a variety of scripts, from
different parts of the country.
The team worked out a
method of comparing verses from each manuscript.
2. They selected the verses that appeared common
to most versions and published these in several
volumes, running into over 13,000 pages. The project
took 47 years to complete.
3. The manuscripts were found from Kashmir and
Nepal and Tamil Nadu. Also evident were enormous
regional variations in the ways in which the text had
been transmitted over the cenniries. These variations
were documented in foomotes and appendiccs to the
main text. Taken together, more than half the 13,000
pages are devoted to these variations.
4. In a sense, these variations arc reflective of the

complex processes that shaped early (and later) social
histories — through dialogues between dominant
traditions and resilient local ideas and practices.
These dialogues are charactensed by moments of
conflict as well as consensus. When issues of social
history were explored, the belief that everything
that was laid down in these texts was actually
practiced was not always true and that they were also
questioned and occassionally even rejected.
38. Explain how the chronicle ‘Ain-i-Akbari’ is the
major source to understand agararian history
of sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Also,
explain the method of irrigation and technology
used during that period.
[8]
OR
Explain the role played by Zamindars during
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in India. .

Answer : ‘Ain-i-Akbari’ can be supplemented
by descriptions contained in sources emanating
from regions away from the Murhal capital. These
include detailed revenue records from Gujarat,

Maharashtra and Rajasthan dating from seventeenth
and cighteenth centuries.
Ain-i-Akbari is a mine of information regarding
apriculmural aspects of Mughal rule. It recorded
meticulously the arangements made by the state to
ensute cultivation. The aim of Ain was to present
a vision of Akbar’s empire where social harmery

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

prevailed record instances of conflicts between
peasants, zamundars and the state. In the process,
they give us an insight into the peasants’ perception
and their expectations of fairness from the State.
Irrigation and Technology : The abundance of
land, available labour and the mobility of peasants
were three factors that accounted for the constant
expansion of agriculture. Since the prmary purpose
of agriculture is to feed people, basic staples such
as rice, wheat or millets were the most frequently
cultivated crops.
Though Indian Agriculeure was dependent on
Monsoons, crops which required addinonal water.
Artificial systems of irrigation then began to be used.
Though agriculture was labour intensive, peasants did
use technologies that often harnessed cattle energy.
The wooden plough, was light and could be easily
assembled with an iron tip or coulter It therefore
did not make deep furrows, which preserved the
moisture better during the intensely hot months.
A drill, pulled by a pair of piant oxen, was used to
plant seeds, but broadcasting of seeds was the most
prevalent method. Hoeing and weeding were done
simultaneously using a narrow iton blade with a small
wooden handle.
OR
Role played by the Zamindars in the sixteenth and
seventeeth centuries in India :
(i) ‘The zamindars were the proprietors of their
lands. They could sell, bequeath or mortgage these
at will. They enjoyed certain social and economic
privileges because of their superior status in rural
society.
(ii) The zamindars belonged to the upper caste
which added to their exalted starus in society.
(iii) The zamindars rendered certain services
(Khidmat) for the state. So they received respect and
position in the state.

(iv) The zamindars attained power as their job was
to collect revenue on behalf on the state, for which

they were compensated financially.
(v)

Control over military resources was another

source of power. Most zamindars had fortresses
(qilachas) as well as an armed contingent comprising
units of cavalry, artillery and infantry.
(vi) The zamindars spearheaded the colonisation of
agricultural land, and helped in settling culnvators
by providing them with the means of cultivation,
including cash loans. The buying and selling of
zamindaris accelerated the process of monetization
in the countryside.

www.chsepdf.com

Do

mioad All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepadf.com

(vii) The zamindars also sold the produce from
their milkiyat lands. There is evidence to show that
zamindars often established markets (haats) to which
peasants also came to sell their produce.

(viii) If we observe social relation of village of
Mughal age as a pyramid, then zamindars wete at
the top. They occupied the highest position in the
society.
39. “The Non-Cooperation Movement was training
for self rule.” Analyze the statement of American
biographer Louis Fisher in the context of Indian
Nationalism.

[8]

OR
“The Salt Satyapraha was one of the most
successful campaigns in Gandhiji’s non-violent

strugple against Britishers.”* Analyse the
statement.

Answer : Gandhiji hoped that by coupling Noncooperation with Khilafat, the Hindus and Muslims
collectrvely will bring an end to the British rule.
These movements were a surge of popular action

that was unprecedented in colonial rule. The people
were asked to stop attending schools, colleges and
law courts, and not pay taxes. In sum, they were
asked to adhere to a “renunciation of (all) voluntary
association with the (Bntish) Government”. If

non-cooperation was effectively carried out, said
Gandhiji, India would win swaraj within a year.
Consquently, students stopped going to schools and
colleges run by the government. Lawyers refused to
attend court. The working class went on strike in
many towns and cities. According to official figures,
there were 396 strikes in 1921, involving 600,000
workers and a loss of seven million workdays. The
countryside was filled with discontent too. Hill tribes
in Northern Andhra violated the forest laws. Farmers
in Awadh did not pay taxes and peasants in Kumaun
refused to carry loads for colonial officials.
These protest movements were someumes carried
out in defiance of the local nationalist leadership.
Peasants, workers, and others interpreted and acted

upon the call to “noo-cooperate” with colonial rule
in ways that best suited their interests. The main
ideas behind the movement were Satya, Satyagraha,
Ahimsa, Self discipline. The British Raj was shaken
to its foundation. The non cooperanon movement
brought people from different parts of the country
to fight against the Brush. People of all castes and
creeds participated in the movement. People from
all classes of society participated in the movement.
Khadi, promotion of village industries, HinduMuslim unity, abolition of untouchability, boycott of
British goods and social reforms wete an imporant

6

No OTP No Lagin No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Di

—_

part of the movement. Chauri Chaura incident
forced Gandhi to call off the Non-Cooperation
Movement.

In words of Mahatma Gandhi’s American biographer
Louts Fischer, “Non-cooperation became the name

of an epoch in the life of India and of Gandhiji.
Non-cooperation was negative enough to be peaceful
but positive enough to be effective. It entailed denial,
renunciation, and self-discipline. Ir was training for
self-rule,”
OR
In the wake of the Sale Law March, nearly 60,000
Indians were arrested, among them, of course,
Gandhiji himself. The progress of Gandhiji’s march

to the seashore can be traced from the secret reports
fled by the police officials deputed to monitor his
movements.
Gandhiji persuaded the citizens to stand united. The
police spies reported that Gandhiji’s meetings were
very well attended, by villagers of all castes. They
observed thousands of volunteers flocking to the
nationalist cause. Among them were many officials,
who had resigned from their posts with the colonial
povernment.
The progress of the Salt March can also be traced
from another source: the American news magazine,
Time’, Earlier it despised Gandhiji’s looks, writing
disdainfully, of his “spindly frame” and his “spidery
loins”, Thus in its first report, Time was deeply
sceptical of the Salt March reaching its destination.
It claimed that Gandhi “sank to the ground” at the
end of the second day’s walking; the magazine did not
believe that “the emaciated saint would be physically
able to go much further”.
But within a week it had changed its mind, observing
the massive popular following that the march had
garnered. They then saluted Gandhyji as a “Saint”
and “Statesman”, who was using “Christian acts as a
weapon against men with Christian beliefs”,
The Salt March gained the world’s attention. The
march was widely covered by the European and
American press. It was the first nationalist acuvity
in which women participated in large numbers. The
socialist activist Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay had
persuaded Gandhiji not to restrict the protests to
men alone. Kamaladevi was herself one of numerous
women who courted arrest by breaking the salt or
liquor laws. The march made the British réalize that
their dominance would not last forever and that they

would have to devolve some power to the Indians.
PART-D
40. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow ;
A Prayer to Agni

Here are two verses from the Rigvedz invoking Agni,
the god of fire :

wiwiweocbsepdf.com

1

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

Bnog, O strong one, this sacrifice of ours to the
gods. O wise one, as a liberal giver. Bestow on us,
O priest, abundant food. Agni, obtain, by sacrificing,
mighty wealth for us. Procure, O Agni, for ever to
him who prays to you {the gift of} nourishment, the
wonderful cow. May a son be ours offspring that
continues out line.
Versus such as these were composed in a special kind
of Sanskrit, known as Vedic Sanskrit. They were
taught orally to men belonging to priestly families.
(13.1)
Why was Vedic Sanskrit significant ?

[2]
(13.2)

Explain any two Vedic traditions of
religious beliefs and practices.
[2]
(13.3) Why were sacrifices performed during
Vedic Period ?
[3]
Answer : (13.1) Verses were mostly composed in a

special kind of Sanskrit, known as Vedic Sanskmnit.
They were taught orally to men belonging to priestly
families.
(13.2) 1. The principal deities of the Vedic pantheon,
Agni, Indra and Soma, become marginal figures,
rately visible in textual or visual representations.
2. Those who valued the Vedic tradition often
condemned practices that went beyond the closely
regulated contact with the divine through the

performance of sacrifices or precisely chanted
mantras.
(13.3) Many of these hymns from the Rigveda, were
chanted when sacrifices were performed, where
people prayed for cattle, sons, good health, long
life, etc.

41. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
The One Lord

Here is a composition attributed to Kabir :
Tell me, brother, how can rhere be
No one lord of the world but two ?
Who led you so astray ?
God ts called by many names :
Names

like Allah, Ram, Karim, Keshav, Han and

Hazrat.
Gold may be shaped into rings and bangles.

Ins't it gold all the same ?
Distinctions are only words we invent......
Kabir ways that are both mistaken.
Neither can find the only Ram. One kills the goat,
the other cows.
They waste their lives in disputauon.

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

(14.1)

(14.2)
(14.3)

How has Kabir laid emphasis on the
attainment of oneness with the divine ?
Explain.
4
Howdo you think the people waste their
lives in disputation ?
[2]
How has the lyrical beauty of his poem
made him a figure of inter-religious
harmony ? Explain.
[3]

Answer : (14.1) Kabir says that God has many
natnes like Allah, Ram, Karim, Keshav, Hari, and
Hazrat. But the fact 1s that this distinction is only
based on the words invented and in reality there is
only one God.

He repudiated idol worship and emphasized that
there is only one God. He is a Nirguna bhakti saint.
To him the ulumate reality is Alakh and Nirakar.
He used terms like Atman and Brahman. He also
used words with mystical connotation like Shabda
or Shunya.
(14.2) People waste their lives in pointless disputation

between
Allah and Ram so as to emphasis or enforce
one’s beliefs and ideas over another.
(i) People think that there are many Gods.
{ii) Kabir says that there is one God who is called
by many names.
(iii) Some think that their God is pleased when
a goat is killed and other feel that God is pleased
when a cow is killed. Both are wasting their hives in
disputation.
(14.3) Kabir believed in one God who prevails
everywhere. God can be realized through recitation
of Namsimran, Zikr, [shy. Kabir emphasizes the
harmony among all religions and states to end
‘disputations’.

42. Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow:
The Muslim League resolution of 1940

The League's resolution of 1940 demanded :
That geographically contiguous units are demarcated

into regions, which should be so constituted, with
such territorial readjustments as may be necessary,

that the areas in which the Muslims ate numerically
in a majority as in the north-western and eastern
zones of India should be grouped to constitute
“Independent States”, in which the constiruent units
shall be autonomous and sovereign.
(15.1)
Identify the major demands of the
Muslim League.
[2]
(15.2) Analyse the reasons for the demand of
autonomy by the Muslim League. [2]

www.cbsepdf.com

Da

vnioad All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

(15.3)

Analyse the distinctive aspects of the
Muslim League Resolution of 1940. [3]
OR
Read the following extract carefully and answer
the questions that follow :
A Small Basket of Grapes

This is what Dr. Khushdeva Singh writes about his
experience during onc of his visits to Karachi in
1949 ;
My friends took me to a room at the airport where we
all sat down and talked... (and) had lunch together. I

had to travel from Karachi to London at 2.30 am. At 5.00 p.m. ....E told my friends that they had given me
so generously of their time. J thought it would be too
much for them to wait the whole night and suggested
they must spare themselves the trouble. But nobody
left unul it was dinner time .... Then they said they
were leaving and that I must have a little rest before
emplaning. .... | got up at about 1.45 a.m. and when
T opened the door, I saw that all of them were sull
there.... They all accompanied me to the plane, and

before parting, presented me with a small basket of
grapes. I had no words to express my gratitude for
the overwhelming affection with which I was treated
and the happiness this stopover had given me.
(15.1)

Analyse the attitude of the people of
Karachi towards Khushdeva Singh. [2]

(15.2)

Express the feelings of Khushdeva
Singh at Karachi.
[2]

(15.3)

“Love is stronger than hate."' Elucidate
the statement in the context of this

nartative,
[3]
Answer: The Muslim League resolution of 1940
(15.1) The Muslim League moved a resolution at
Lahore demanding a measure of autonomy for the
Muslim-majority areas of the subcontinent. The
areas of Muslim majority in North West and Eastern
zones should be grouped together to constitute
independent states. The constituent units shall be
autonomous and sovereign.
(15.2) (i) The outcome of provincial elections of
1937 and the attitude of the Congress thereafter.
(ii) They wanted autonomous and sovereign zones
for Muslims.
(iit) They wanted geographically contiguous units
demarcated into regions.
(iv) Muslim majority areas can be made autonomous.
(v) Emphasis on two nation theory,
(vi) They fele that only a Muslim majority province
will ensure the protection and preservation of
Muslim culture.

3

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Di

(15.3) On 23 March 1940, the Muslim League
moved a resolution at Lahore demanding a measure
of autonomy for the Muslim-majority areas of
the subcontinent. However, the resolution never
mentioned partition or Pakistan.
Muslim J.eapue Resolution of 1940:
(i) They wanted autonomous for Muslims and
sovereign zones for Muslims.

(ii) They wanted geographically contiguous units
demarcated into repions.
(iii) Muslim majority areas can be made autonomous.
In fact Sikandar Hayat Khan, Punjab Premier and
leader of the Unionist Party, who had drafted the
resolution, declared in a Punjab assembly speech
on 1 March 1941 that he was opposed to the idea
of Pakistan that would mean “Muslim Raj here and
Hindu Raj elsewhere ... If Pakistan means unalloyed
Muslim Raj in the Punjab then I will have nothing
to do with it.”
OR
A Small Basket of Grapes

(15.1) From the text we come know that the people
in Karachi have been very generous with their time.
They treated him very well and also accompanied
him to the plane and gifted him a basket of grapes.
|

www.cbsepdf.com

oo oN

1

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbhsepdf.com

Singh was overwhelmed with happincss at the
penctosity and respect given by the people.

(15.2) At Karachi airport many people came to
receive him. He enjoyed the time he had spent with
the people of Karachi and didn’t have the words to
express his happiness,
(15.3) He was overwhelmed with love and generosity
he received at Karachi airport. Kushdeva Singh had
showered love and compassion on the people and
in retutn he got love and respect from his friends
at Karachi.
PART-E
43. (16.1) On the given political outline map of
India. Locate and label the following with
appropriate symbols :
(a) Agra, a territory under Mughals.
OR

Vijaynagara
(b) Champaran, a centre of National Movement
OR
Gwalior — a centre of the Revolt of 1857.
(16.2) On the same outline map three places have
been marked as A, B, C which are related to the
mature Harappan sites. Identify them and write
their correct names on the lines marked near
them.

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Do

History 2019 (Delhi)
Time allowed

; 3 hours
Answer
Note : Except for the following questions, all the
remaining questions have been asked in previous
set.

PART-A
44. “Coinage plays a valuable role in determning

certain period of Indian history.” Justify the
statement giving two points.
[2]
Answer : Coinage plays a valuable role in determining
certain periods of Indian history. Here are some
instances :
(i) Punch-marked coins made of silver and copper
{c. sixth century BCE onwards) were amongst the
earliest to be minted and used. These were recovered
from excavations at a number of sites throughout the
subcontinent. Numismatists made several attempts
to identify the symbols on punch-marked coins with
specific ruling dynasties, including the Mauryas,
suggesting that these were issued by kings. It is also
hkely that merchants, bankers and townspeople issued
some of these coins.

www..cbhsepdf.com

rh}

(ii) The first coins to bear the names and images
of rulers were issued by the Indo-Greeks, who

vnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

a, a territory under Mughal
falior-a cantre of the Revolt of 1857

” Banawall/Rakhi Garhi

¢~.@

Champaran-@ centre

of Nationa! Movement

SET II
Maximum marks

: &0

established control over the north-western part of
the subcontinent c. second century BCE. The first
gold coins were issued c, first century CE by the
Kushanas, Some of the most spectacular gold coins
were issued by the Gupta rulers. Archaeologists have
unearthed several thousand copper coins issued by
the Yaudheyas, pointing to the latter’s interest and
participation in economic exchanges,
45. Why is Al-Bituni is text “Kitab-ul-Hind”
considered as a voluminuous text ?
[2]
Answer : Al-Biruni’s Kitab-ul-Hind comprises 80

chapters on subjects such as religion and philosophy,
festivals, astronomy, alchemy, manners and customs

social life, weights and measures, iconography, laws
and metrology.
Al-Biruni adopted a distinctive structure in each

chapter, beginning with a question, followed by
a description based on Sanskritic traditions, and

concluding with a comparison with other cultures.
PART-B
46. Describe

the

administrative

Mauryan Empire.

0

features

of the

[4]

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

Di

Answer : The regions included within the empire
were just too diverse. The Empire extended from
Northwest India to Andhra Pradesh, Orissa. It 1s

believed that administrative control was strongest in
areas around the capital and the provincial centres.
These centres were carefully chosen, both Taxila and
Ujjayini being situated on important long-distance
trade routes, while Suvarnagiri (litcrally, the golden
mountain) was possibly important for tapping the
pold mines of Karnataka.
Communication along both land and nverine routes
was vital. The army was an important tool for not
only extending the territories of the empire but also
administering them.
Mepasthenes

mentions

a committee

with

six

subcommittees for coordinating military activity. Of
these, one looked after the navy, the second managed
transport and provisions, the third was responsible
for foot-soldiers, the fourth for horses, the fifth for
chariots and the sixth for elephants. The activites
of the second subcommuttee were rather varied:

arranging for bullock carts to carry equipment,
procuring food for soldiers and fodder for animals,
and recruiting servants and artisans to look after the
soldiers.
47. ‘Mahanavami Dibba of Vijaynagara was
the centre of elaborate rituals.’ Explain the
statement with suitable examples.
f4]

Answer : (i} Mahanavami Dibba 1s a platform
with a base of 11,000 sq. ft. and a height of 40 fr.
It supports a wooden structure. The base of the
platform is covered with relief carvings.

(ii) Rituals associated with Mahanavami Dibba
probably coincided with the festival of Mahanavami,
also known as Dussehra, Durga Puja and Navaratri.
(iii) The Vijayanagra kings displayed their prestige,
power and suzerainty.
(iv) The ceremonies performed on the occasion
included worship of the image, worship of the
state horse, and the sacnfice of buffaloes and other
animals,
(v) Dances, wrestling matches, and processions of
nchly decked horses, elephants and chariots and
soldiers, as well as ritual presentations by the nayakas
before the king and his guests.
(vi) On the last day of the festival, the king inspected
his army as well as the nayakas of the army. He also
accepted pift from the nayakas,
48. Why did N. G. Ranga urpue to interpret minorities
in the economic terms in the Constituent

Assembly ? Explain.

www. cbsepdf.com

[4]

2

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

Answer : N.G. Ranga, a socialist who had been a
leader of the peasant movement, urged that the term
minonties be interpreted in economic terms. The real
minorities were the poor and the downtrodden. He
said that the people were so depressed and oppressed
that they were not able to take advantage of the
ordinary civil nghts.
He welcomed the legal nghts the Constitution
was pranting to each individual but pointed to its
limits. In his opinion it was meaningless for the
poor people in the villages to know that they now
had the fundamental right to live, and to have full
employment, or that they could have their meetings,
their conferences, their associations and vatious othet
civil liberties. It was essential to create conditions
where these constitutionally enshrined rights could
be effectively enjoyed. The tribal traditional laws are
violated and their lands are snatched by merchants.
The tribals are treated like slaves. The money lenders

exploited the poor tubals. The zamindars exploited
poor villagers. The poor peasant and the tribals do
not get even basic education. For this they needed
protection. Ranga said, “They need props. They
need a ladder.”
PART-C
49. “Quit India Movement” was genuinely a mass

movement bringing into its ambition hundreds
of thouands of ordinary Indians.” Analyse the
statement.

[8]
OR

“The worst is over but Indians need to work

collectively for the equality of all classes and
creeds.” Substantiate the statement of Gandhiji
for bringing communal peace after the partition
of India.
Answer : The Quit India movement was launched

in August 1942 by Gandhiji The slogan of the
movement was ‘Do or Die’ and ‘British leave India’.
It was the third major movement againt British Rule.
Although Gandhiji was jailed at once, younger
activists organised strikes and acts of sabotage all
over the country. They, in very large numbers, left
their colleges to go to jail. Particularly active in the
underground resistance wete socialist members
of the Conpress, such as Jayaprakash Narayan.
In several districts, such as Satara in the west and

Medinipur in the east, “independent” governments
were proclairned. A large number of women across
the country also participated in the processions.
The British responded with much force, yet it

took more than a year to suppress the rebellion.
Thousands of Indians joined the mass movement.

L

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE

2019 History Solved Paper

The Congress leaders were sent to jail. Jinnah
expanded his influence over Muslims in Punjab and
Sind. In 1944, Gandhiji was released from prison.
Afterwards the Conpress started negotiations with
the League.
OR

On 26 January, 1948, at his prayer meeting he said that
“the worst is over’, that Indians would henceforth
work collectively for the “equality of all classes and

creeds, never the domunation and superiority of the
major community over a minor, however insignificant
it may be in numbers or influence”,
He had the hope that geographically and politically
India was divided into two but the people will remain
friends and brothers forever and respect and help
each other.

Many scholars have written of the months after
Independence as being Gandhiji's “finest hour”. After

History 2019 (Delhi)
Time allowed

: 3 hours

Note : Except for the following questions, all the

remaining questions have been asked in previous
set,

PART-A
50. ““Mauryan Empire was regarded as a major
landmark in the early Indian history.” Justify the
statement piving two points.
[2]
Answer : Mauryan Empire was regarded as a major
landkark in the Indian History :
(i) ft lasted for about 150 years and extended control
as for northwest as Afghanistan and Baluchistan in
the south up to Andhra Pradesh.
(ii} Some of the archaeological finds associated
with the Mauryas, including stone sculpture, were
considered to be examples of the spectacular art

typical of empires.
51. Why is Francois Bernier's work “Travels in the
Mughal Empire” marked importantin Europe ?
Give two reasons.
[2]
Answer: (i) Bemier’s “Travels in the Mughal Empire”
contains detailed observations, critical insights and
reflectton, His account contains discussions trying
to place the history of the Mughals within some sort
of a universal framework. He constantly compared
Mughal India with contemporary Europe, generally
emphasising the superiority of the larter.
(ii} His representation of India works on the model
of binary opposition, where India is presented as the

www, cbsepdf.com

Do

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From wwaw.cbhsepcdf.com

working to bring peace to Bengal, Gandhiji shifted
to Delhi, from where he hoped to move on to the

niot-torn districts of Punjab, While in the capital, his
meetings were disrupted by refugees who objected to
readings from the Koran or shouted slogans,
Gandhi was concerned about munontes in India as
well as Pakistan.
Due to the inittative of Gandhiji and Nehru, the
Rights of Minonties Resolution was passed by the
Congress. Gandhiji was a one man army in his efforts to restore communal harmony, He believed that
people’s hearts could be changed with Non-Violence.
Gandhij came to Delhi in Sep. 1947 and addressed
the Sikhs at Sisgan) Gurudwara to bing peace. He
started a fast to bring about a change in the hearts
of people.

SET III
Maximum

inverse of Europe.

marks : 80

He also ordered the perceived

differences hierarchically, so thar India appeared to
be inferior to the Western world.
PART-B
52. Describe the featurers of Coinage from sixty
century BCE till sixth century CE.
[4]
Answer : The features of the Coinage during the
periodic 600 BCE-600 CE are as menttoned below:
(i) Punch-marked coins of silver and copper were
the earliest to be minted and used.
Gi) These coins were issued by the kings, merchant
bankers and towns people.
(iii) The tribal republics such as the Yaudheyas of
Punjab and Haryana also issued coins.

(iv) The gold coins issued by the Gupta rulers were
most spectacular and remarkable for their purity.
53. Abdur Razzaq and Domingo Paes were impressed
by the fortification of the Vijaynagar Empire.
Explain the statement with suitable examples.

[4]

Answer : Persian traveller Abdur Razzaq, came to
India in 1443 (during the time Deva Ray I) gives very

impressive description of city of Vijayanagara. He
wrote that Vijayanagara was an unprecedented city,
the life of which was neither ever heard
or seen 1n the
whole word. This city is built in such a way that its
seven puarding fort gates are built within each, other.
In the city there is a separate market place of every
occupation. The royal palace is very vast.
Domingo Paes, a Portuguese traveller had described
that Vijayanagata was the most prosperous city

2

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

CBSE 2019 History Solved Paper

De

having vast granaries of rice, wheat etc. The market
roadside of the city were full of innumerable things.
54. Why did Dr. B. R. Ambedkar argue for Strong
Centre in the Constituent Assembly ? Explain.[4]
Answer : Ambedkar had declared that he wanted
“a strong and united Centre much stronger than the
Centre we had created under the Government of
India Act of 1935”. The need for a strong centre in
the Constituent Assembly was important to save the
nation from the riots and violence. Many members
had repeatedly stated that the powers of the Centre
had to be greatly strengthened to enable it to stop
the communal frenzy.
One member from the United Provinces, Balakrishna

Sharma, reasoned at length that only a strong centre
could plan for the well-being of the country, mobilise
the available economic resources, establish a proper
administration, and defend the country against
foreign aggression.
There was already a unitary system in place, imposed
by the colonial government. The violence of the
times made it necessary both to forestall chaos and
to plan for the country’s economic development.
PART-C
55. “Gandhiji and ‘Salt Satyagraha’ had made the
Batish rulers desperately anxious.” Analyse the
statement of Times, American news mapazine
in this context,
[8]
OR
“Historians have used different kinds of sources in
reconstructing the political career of Gandhiji and
the history of social and nationalist movements,”
Substantiate the statement with examples.
Answer ; Secret reports were filed by the police
officials who monitored Gandhij1’s movements.
They also reproduced the speeches that he pave at
the villages en route, in which he called upon local
officials to renounce government employment
and join the freedom struggle. The police spics
of the Batish reported about Gandhiji’s meetings
and also who all attended them, They observed
that thousands of volunteers were flocking to the
nationalist cause. Among them were many officials,
who had resigned from their posts with the colonial
government. Writing to the government, the District
Superintendent of Police remarked, “Mr Gandhi
appeared calm and collected. He is gathering morc
strength as he proceeds.”
The American newsmagazine, “Timc’ was decply
sceptical of the Salt March reaching its destination

www.chsepdf.com

2

wnload All Previous Year and Sample Papers From www.cbsepdf.com

and scorned at Gandhiji’s looks, wotng with disdain
of his “spindly frame” and his “spidery loins’. It
claimed that Gandhiji “sank to the ground” at the end

of the second day’s walking, The magazine did not
believe that “the emaciated saint would be physically
able to go much further”.
But within a week it had changed its mind and wrote
that the massive popular following that the march
had made the British rulers “desperately anxious”.
OR
(i) Public voice and private scripts : Important
sources Of the writings and speeches of Mahatma
Gandhi and his contemporaries, including both his
associates and his political adversaries. Speeches,

for instance, allow us to hear the public voice of
an individual, while private letters give us a glimpse
of his or her private thoughts. Mahatma Gandhi
tcpularly published in his journal, ‘Harijan’, Ictters
that others wrote to him. Nehru edited a collection of
letters written to him during the national movement
and published ‘A Bunch of Old Letters’.
(ii) Framing a picture: Autobiographics similarly
give us an account of the past that 1s often rich in
human detail. But these are retrospective accounts
wiitten very often from memory. They tell us what
the author could recollect and thought as important
to wnte and be viewed by others.
(iii) Through police eyes : Another vital source is
government records. The letters and reports wiitten
by policemen and other officials were secret at the
time; but now can be accessed in archives.

For instance, the fortnightly reports that were
prepared by the Home Department from the early
twentieth centuty. These reports were based on police
information from the localities, but often expressed
what the higher officials saw, or wanted to believe.
The march was seen as a drama, an antic, a desperate

effort to mobilise people who were unwilling to rise
against the British and pleased with the British Raj.
(iv) From newspapers : One more mmportart source
Is contemporary newspapers, published in English
as well as in the different Indian languages, which
tracked Mahatma Gandhi’s movements and reported
on his activitics, and also represented what the people
thought of him. However, newspaper accounts can
too be prejudiced politically.

The accounts that were published in a London
newspaper would be different from the report in an
Indian nationalist paper.
ee

3

No OTP No Login No Adversitement

