Short Answer Questions

Q.1. What do you mean by the ‘Theory of Plate Tectonics’?
Ans. Earth scientists have explained the formation of physical features with
the help of some theories and one such theory is the ‘Theory of Plate
Tectonics’. According to this theory, the crust i.e., the upper part of the Earth
has been formed out of seven major and some minor plates. The movement
of these plates resulted in building up of stresses within the plates, leading to
folding, faulting and volcanic activities.
Q.2. What are the three types of plate movements on the Earth?
Ans. (i) Convergent boundary: When some plates come towards each other,
they form a convergent boundary. It may also be called folding movements.
(ii) Divergent boundary: When some plates move away from each other they
form a divergent boundary. It is also called faulting movements.
(iii) Transform boundary: In the event of two plates coming together, they
may either collide and crumble or may slide under the other and form the
transform boundary.
Q.3. How were the northern plains formed?
Ans. (i) The northern plains have been formed by the interplay of the three
major river systems—the Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra along with
their tributaries.
(ii) The Himalayan uplift out of the Tethy’s sea and subsidence of the
northern flank of the Peninsular plateau resulted in the formation of a large
basin. In due course of time, this depression gradually got filled with the
deposition of the sediments by the rivers flowing from mountains in the
north. A flat land with extensive alluvial deposits by these rivers led to the
formation of the Northern Plains of India.
(iii) With a rich soil cover, combined with adequate water supply and
favourable climate, it is agriculturally a very productive part of India.
Q.4. Give a brief description of the Himalayan mountains.
Ans. The Himalayas, geologically young and structurally fold mountains
stretch over the northern borders of India. These mountain ranges run in a
west-east direction from the Indus to the Brahmaputra. The Himalayas are

loftiest and one of the most rugged mountain barriers of the world. They
form an arc, which covers a distance of 2,400 kilometres.
Q.5. Describe the three parallel ranges of the Himalayas.
Ans. The three parallel ranges of the Himalayas are:
(i) Himadri (Great or Inner Himalayas)
It is the most continuous range. The northernmost range is called the
Himadri. It consists of loftiest peaks with an average height of 6,000 metres.
It contains all the prominent peaks. It remains snow covered throughout the
year, resulting into the formation of glaciers and some perennial rivers.
(ii) Himachal (Lesser Himalayas)
It lies to the south of Himadri and forms the most rugged mountain system.
The ranges are mainly composed of highly compressed and altered rocks.
Average height is between 3,700 to 4,500 metres. Some famous ranges are
the Pir Panjal range, Dhaula Dhar and Mahabharat ranges. It has some
famous valleys like Kullu, Kangra and Kashmir. They are known for their hill
stations. The average width is 50 Km.
(iii) Shiwaliks (Outer Himalayas)
This is the outermost range of the Himalayas. Its height varies between 900
and 1,100 metres. These ranges are composed of unconsolidated rock
material, so these ranges are prone to earthquakes and landslides. These
longitudinal valleys lying between lesser Himalayas and Shiwaliks are called
‘Duns’ like Dehra Dun, Kotli Dun and Patti Dun, etc.
Q.6. Name the highest peaks of the Himalayas with their heights.
Ans. (i) Mt. Everest – 8,848 metres, Nepal
(ii) Kanchenjunga –

8,598 metres, India

(iii) Makalu – 8,481 metres, Nepal
(iv) Dhaulagiri – 8,172 metres, Nepal
(v) Nanga Parbat –

8,126 metres, India

(vi) Annapurna – 8,078 metres, Nepal
(vii) Nanda Devi – 7,817 metres, India
(viii) Kamet –

7,756 metres, India

(ix) Namcha Barwa

– 7,756 metres, India

(x) Gurla Mandhata

–

7,728 metres, Nepal

Q.7. Classify the Himalayas on the basis of regions from the West to
East.
Ans. This division of the Himalayas is demarcated by the river valleys.
(i) Punjab Himalayas: This part of the Himalayas lies between the rivers
Indus and Satluj. It is also known as Kashmir and the Himachal Himalayas.
(ii) Kumaon Himalayas: This part of the Himalayas lies between Satluj and
Kali rivers.
(iii) Nepal Himalayas: This part of the Himalayas lies between Kali and
Teesta rivers.
Q.8. What do you know about ‘Purvanchal’?
Ans. The Eastern Hills are collectively known as ‘Purvanchal’.
These hills running through the north-eastern states are mostly composed of
strong sandstones which are sedimentary rocks. They are covered with
dense forest; they mostly run as parallel ranges and valleys. Purvanchal
comprises of the Mizo hills, Naga hills, Manipur hills, Patkai Bum, Garo, Khasi
and Jaintia hills.
Q.9. How are riverine islands formed?
Ans. The rivers coming from the northern mountains carry alluvium with
them and do the depositional work. In the lower course, due to gentle slope,
the velocity of the river decreases which results in the formation of riverine
islands.
Q.10. Classify the Northern Plains on the basis of its location.
Ans. The Northern Plains are broadly divided into three sections:
(i) Punjab Plains: The western part of the Northern Plain is called the
Punjab Plains. It is formed by the river Indus and its tributaries.
(ii) Ganga Plains: It extends between Ghaggar and Teesta rivers. It is
spread over the states of North India, i.e., Delhi, Haryana, UP, Bihar and
parts of Jharkhand and West Bengal.
(iii) Brahmaputra Plains: To the east of the Ganga plain lies the
Brahmaputra Plain. They cover the areas of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh.
Q.11. Write any three characteristics of the Central Highlands.

Ans. The part of the Peninsular plateau lying to the north of the Narmada
river, covering a major area of the Malwa plateau is known as the ‘Central
Highlands’.
Its three characteristics are:
(i) They stretch from the north-west with the Aravalis, further merging with
the sandy and rocky desert of Rajasthan.
(ii) They are wider in the West but narrower in the east.
(iii) The eastward extension of this plateau is locally known as ‘Bundelkhand’
and ‘Baghelkhand’. The ‘Chotanagpur plateau’ is the easternmost part of this
plateau, which is drained by the river Damodar.
Q.12. Differentiate between western coastal plains and eastern
coastal plains.
Ans. Western Coastal Plains
(i) It is a narrow plain.
(ii) This part of the plain receives rains from South West Monsoons.
(iii) Narmada and Tapti rivers flow from it, forming estuaries.
Eastern Coastal Plains
(i) It is a wide and levelled plain.
(ii) Coromandel Coast receives rains from North East Monsoons.
(iii) All the major peninsular rivers form a delta by making the land fertile.
Q.13. Where are the famous Passes of Himalayas located?
Ans. Shipkila Pass: It is located on the Tibet–Himalaya Road. It lies in the
Satluj valley in Himachal Pradesh.
Nathula Pass: It is on the way from India to Lhasa. It lies in the Chumbi
valley in Sikkim.
Bomdila Pass: It lies further east in Arunachal Pradesh. It leads to
Arunachal–China border.
Q.14. What do you know about valleys and duns in Himalayas?
Ans. The Kashmir valley is so beautiful that it is described as ‘paradise on
the earth’. The Kangra and Kullu valleys in Himachal Pradesh are also
beautiful. The Kathmandu valley in Nepal is famous as well. Small valleys in

Kumaon Himalayas of Uttarakhand are called ‘duns’. Some of the famous
duns are Dehra Dun, Kotli Dun and Patli Dun.
Q.15. Give some important characteristics of Northern Plains.
Ans. (i) The Northern Plains of India lie between the Himalayas in the north
and Peninsular Plateau in the South.
(ii) They are made of the fine silt or alluvium, brought down by rivers from
the Himalayas and the Peninsular Plateau.
(iii) These plains are one of the world’s most extensive and fertile plains.
They are drained by three major rivers—the Indus, the Ganga and the
Brahmaputra and their tributaries.
Q.16. How were Andaman and Nicobar Islands formed?
Ans. (i) It is believed that these islands are an elevated portion of submarine
mountains in the Bay of Bengal.
(ii) They are located on a submerged or submarine hill range and are
probably formed by the volcanic eruptions.
(iii) Some of the volcanic mountains are still active over here. They are
larger in size and are known for their variety of flora and fauna.
Q.17. Which are the coral islands of India?
Ans. (i) Lakshadweep are the coral islands of India as they are formed by
coral deposits.
(ii) Such islands are formed by the deposition of skeletons of microscopic
species, called coral polyps on the seabed.
(iii) They live only in shallow warm waters. Many of these islands are in ring
shape or horse shoe shape, called atolls.
These islands are located in the warm water of Arabian Sea.
Q.18. How the Northern plains of India formed?
Ans. Formation of Himalayas resulted in the formation of a large basin. In
due course of time this depression gradually got filled with deposition of
sediments by rivers flowing from mountains in the north and the Peninsular
plateau in the south. A flat land of extensive alluvial deposits led to the
formation of Northern Plains of India.
Q.19. What are the local names of the Western Coastal Plains?

Ans. The northern part of the coast is called the ‘Konkan’ (Mumbai – Goa),
the central stretch is called the ‘Kannad Plain’ (Karnataka) while the
Southern stretch is referred as the ‘Malabar Coast’ (Kerala).

