Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. How can you say that India is a vast country with varied
landforms?
Ans. Our country has practically all major physical features of the earth, i.e.,
mountains, plains, deserts, plateaus and islands.
Q.2. Which factors modified the relief features of India?
Ans. Besides geological formations, a number of processes such as
weathering, erosion and deposition have created and modified the relief to
its present form.
Q.3. What is the ‘Theory of plate Tectonics’?
Ans. According to this theory, the crust of the earth (upper part) has been
formed out of seven major and some minor plates. The movement of the
plates results in the building up of stresses within the plates and the
continental rocks above, leading to folding, faulting and volcanic activity.
Q.4. What was Gondwana land?
Ans. The Gondwana land included India, Australia, South Africa, South
America and Antarctica as one single landmass.
Q.5. What was the result of collision of the Indo-Australian plate
with Eurasian plate?
Ans. Due to this collision, the sedimentary rocks which were accumulated in
the geosyncline known as the Tethys were folded to form the mountain
system of western Asia and Himalaya.
Q.6. What is the other name for ‘Himadri’?
Ans. Inner Himalayas.
Q.7. Name the highest peak of Himalayas.
Ans. Mount Everest Nepal (8,848 metres).
Q.8. Name the highest peak of Himalayas in India.
Ans. Kanchenjunga (8,598 metres).
Q.9. Name some of the highest peaks of Himalayas.

Ans. Dhaulagiri (8,172 metres), Nanga Parbat (8,126 metres), Annapurna
(8,078 metres), Nanda Devi (7,817 metres), & Namcha Barwa (7,756
metres).
Q.10. Name the important passes located in Himalayas.
Ans. Karakoram Pass, Shipkila Pass, Bomdilass Pass.
Q.11. Where is Himalayan range ‘Himachal’ located?
Ans. The range lying to the south of the Himadri forms the most rugged
mountain system and is known as Himachal or lesser Himalaya.
Q.12. Which famous valleys are located in ‘Himachal’?
Ans. The Famous valleys of Kashmir, the Kangra and Kullu are located in
‘Himachal’.
Q.13. Which is the outer most range of Himalayas?
Ans. The outermost range of Himalayas is called the ‘Shiwaliks’.
Q.14. What is average width and altitude of Shiwaliks?
Ans. They extend over a width of 10–50 kms and have a altitude varying
between 900 and 1,100 metres.
Q.15. What are ‘Duns’?
Ans. The longitudinal valley lying between lesser Himalayas and the
Shiwaliks are known as Duns.
Q.16. Name some well known ‘Duns’.
Ans. Dehra Dun, Kotli Dun & Patti Dun are some of the well known Duns.
Q.17. Which hills are called ‘Purvanchal’?
Ans. The Purvanchal comprises the Patkai hills, the Naga Hills, Manipur, the
Mizo hills, Garo, Khasi and Jaintia hills.
Q.18. How Purvanchal or Eastern hills are formed?
Ans. These hills running through the north eastern states are mostly
composed of strong sandstones which are sedimentary rocks. They are
covered with dense forests; they mostly run as parallel ranges & valleys.
Q.19. Which three main river system helped in forming Northern
plains?
Ans. The three main river systems are—The Indus, the Ganga and the
Brahmaputra.

Q.20. What are ‘distributaries’?
Ans. The rivers in their lower course split into numerous channels due to the
deposition of silt. These channels are known as ‘distributaries’.
Q.21. What does ‘doab’ mean?
Ans. ‘Doab’ is made up of two words – ‘do’ means two and ‘ab’ means water.
Q.22. To which parts Ganga Plains are extended?
Ans. The Ganga Plain extends between Ghaggar and Teesta rivers. It is
spread over the states of North India, Haryana, Delhi, U.P., Bihar, partly
Jharkhand and West Bengal.
Q.23. What is ‘Bhabar’?
Ans. The rivers after descending from the mountains deposit pebbles in a
narrow belt of about 8 to 16 kms in width lying parallel to the slopes of the
Shiwaliks, known as ‘bhabar’.
Q.24. Which region is called ‘Terai Region’?
Ans. South of bhabar, the streams and rivers re-emerge and create a wet
swampy & marshy region known as Terai.
Q.25. Name the two major divisions of the Peninsular Plateau?
Ans. They are — The Central Highlands and The Deccan Plateau.
Q.26. Where are The Central Highlands located?
Ans. The part of the Peninsular Plateau lying to the north of the Narmada
river covering a major area of the Malwa Plateau is knows as Central
Highlands.
Q.27. What is the average elevation of Western Ghats?
Ans. Their average elevation is 900–1600 metres.
Q.28. Name the highest of Western Ghats.
Ans. The highest peak of Western Ghats is Anai Mudi (2,695 metres).
Q.29. Name the highest peak of Eastern Ghats.
Ans. The highest peak of Eastern Ghats is Mahendra Giri (1,501 metres).
Q.30. Which is the only large river of Indian Desert of Rajasthan?
Ans. The Luni river.
Q.31. What are Barchans?

Ans. They are crescent–shaped sand dunes covering large areas of
Rajasthan’s Thar desert.
Q.32. By what names are Eastern Coastal plains called?
Ans. In northern part, it is referred to as the Northern Circar while the
Southern part is known as the ‘Coromandel Coast’.
Q.33. Where is Chilika Lake located?
Ans. Odisha, to the south of the Mahanadi Delta.

