Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. What does ‘census’ mean?
Ans. Census is an official counting of population done periodically. In India, it
is done regularly every tenth year.
Q.2. According to 2011 census, which state is most populous?
Ans. According to census 2011 Uttar Pradesh with the population of 199.5
million people is the most populous state of India.
Q.3. In which states of India does half of India’s population live?
Ans. Almost half of India’s population lives in Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Bihar, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh.
Q.4. How is density of population calculated?
Ans. Population density is calculated as the total number of persons living
per square km area.
Q.5. What was the population density of India in 2011 census?
Ans. 382 person per sq. km.
Q.6. What is the highest and lowest density of India?
Ans. Highest density of population is 1029 per sq. kms in West Bengal and
lowest is 17 persons per sq. kms in Arunachal Pradesh.
Q.7. Why do some states of India have sparse population?
Ans. Rugged terrain and unfavourable conditions are primarily responsible
for sparse population in some states of India.
Q.8. Why do most of the peninsular states have moderate
population?
Ans. Most of the peninsular states have moderate population because of
hilly dissected and rocky nature of the terrain, moderate to low rainfall,
shallow and less fertile soils.
Q.9. Why do Northern plains and Kerala have very high density of
population?
Ans. Northern plains and Kerala have a very high density of population
because of flat plains with fertile soils and abundant rainfall.

Q.10. What does growth of population mean?
Ans. Growth of population refers to the change in the number of inhabitants
of a country during a specific period of time, say during the last ten years.
Q.11. How do we get absolute increase in numbers of population?
Ans. It is obtained by simply subtracting the earlier population from the later
population. It is referred as to absolute increase.
Q.12. How is annual growth rate calculated?
Ans. The difference between birth rate and death rate gives us the annual
growth rate.
Q.13. How is birth rate calculated?
Ans. Birth rate is the number of live births per thousand persons in a year.
Q.14. How is death rate counted?
Ans. Death rate is the number of deaths per thousand persons in a year.
Q.15. What is the impact of migration on population?
Ans. Migration plays a very significant role in changing the composition and
distribution of population, normally it adds to the population. It also changes
population composition of urban and rural population in terms of age and sex
composition.
Q.16. What does ‘Age Composition’ mean?
Ans. It refers to the number of people in different age groups in a country.
Q.17. How is ‘Age Composition’ an important component of
population?
Ans. To an important degree, a person’s age influences what he needs, buys,
does and his capacity to perform.
Q.18. In which category are children below 15 years counted?
Ans. Children are economically unproductive and need to be provided with
food, clothing, education and medical care. So, they are counted in
dependent population.
Q.19. What is the age of working population in India?
Ans. Working population is aged between 15-59 years. They are
economically productive and biologically reproductive.
Q.20. What is the current sex ratio in India 2017?

Ans. 945 females for every thousand males.
Q.21. What is the literacy rate of male and female as per the census
of 2011?
Ans. It is 82.14 per cent for males and 65.46 per cent for females.
Q.22. What is referred as occupational structure?
Ans. The distribution of population according to different types of occupation
is referred as occupational structure.
Q.23. What is NPP?
Ans. NPP is National Population Policy 2000, a comprehensive family
planning programme initiated by government of India.

