Long Answer Questions

Q.1. How does India have great physical variations?
Ans. The land of India displays great physical variants such as:
(i) The Peninsular Plateau constitutes one of the ancient landmasses on the
earth’s surface. It was supposed to be one of the most stable land blocks.
(ii) The Himalayas and the Northern Plains are the most recent landforms,
but the Himalayas are the most unstable zone.
(iii) The Himalayas represent a very youthful topography with high peaks,
deep valleys and perennial rivers.
(iv) The Northern Plains are formed by alluvial deposits.
(v) The Peninsular Plateau is composed of igneous and metamorphic rocks.
Therefore, geologically we find great physical variations in India due to
certain changes formed by various tectonic movements inside the Earth.
Q.2. Give five features of the Deccan Plateau.
Ans. (i) The Deccan Plateau is a triangular landmass that lies to the south of
the river Narmada.
(ii) The Satpura range flanks its broad base in the north while the Mahadev,
the Kaimur hills and the Maikal range form its eastward extension.
(iii) It is higher in the west and slopes gently eastwards.
(iv) Its north-east extension is locally known as the Meghalaya and KarbiAnglong plateau and North Cachar Hills. It is separated by a fault from the
Chota Nagpur plateau.
(v) Three prominent hill ranges from the west to east are the Garo, Khasi and
Jaintia hills.
Q.3. Write a few lines on Deccan Trap of the Peninsular Plateau.
What do you know about the distinct features of the peninsular
plateau called the Deccan Trap?
OR
Why is the black soil area in the peninsular part called ‘Deccan
Trap’?

Ans. (i) The black soil area in the peninsular plateau is called the Deccan
Trap.
(ii) This is formed by volcanic activities, so the rocks are igneous.
(iii) These rocks have been denuded over time and are responsible for the
formation of the black soil. Due to continuous flow of lava an extensive lava
plateau has been formed known as Deccan Trap.
(iv) The Aravalis lie on the western and north-western margins of the
peninsular plateau.
(v) These are highly eroded hills and are found as broken hills.
Q.4. Describe the ‘Peninsular Plateau’ of India.
Ans. The Peninsular plateau is a tableland and is composed of the old
crystalline, igneous and metamorphic rocks. It was formed due to the
breaking and drifting of the Gondwana land. It has broad and shallow valleys
and rounded hills. It consists of two broad divisions—Central highlands and
Deccan Plateau. The eastward extensions of this plateau are locally known as
the Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand.
Q.5. Give main characteristics of the division of Great Peninsular
Plateau.
Ans. The Great Peninsular Plateau is the oldest landmass of the Indian
subcontinent. It is divided into two parts:
(i) The Central Highlands
(a) These highlands are made up of hard igneous and metamorphic rocks.
(b) The old Aravalli range borders it in the north-west.
(c) The Central Highlands further consist of the Malwa Plateau in the west
and Chotanagpur region in the east.
(d) The eastward extension of the Malwa Plateau is known as Bundelkhand
and Baghelkand in southern U.P. and northern M.P.
(e) The Malwa Plateau is drained by the southern tributaries of the Yamuna
and the Ganga. Damodar river drains the Chotanagpur plateau.
(ii) The Deccan Plateau
(a) The Deccan Plateau extends from river Narmada to the Southern tip of
the Peninsular India.

(b) It is one of the oldest earth blocks and is made up of hard igneous and
metamorphic rocks.
(c) The Satpura range –northern Mahadev Hills, Maikal range etc. form its
northern edge eastern.
(d) The Western Ghats form its Western edge which is much steeper and
higher than the eastern one. The plateau slopes gently towards the east.
(e) The Eastern edge is marked by Eastern Ghats which are broken into small
hills by rivers.
Q.6. What are the characteristics of coastal plains of India?
Ans.
● These are narrow coastal strips, running along the Arabian Sea on the west
and Bay of Bengal on the east.
● These are known as western coast and eastern coast of the coastal plains.
● The western coast is sandwiched between the Western Ghats and the
Arabian Sea.
● It is a narrow plain and consists of three sections. The northern part of the
coast is called the ‘Konkan’, the central is called ‘Kannad Plain’ and the
southern part is called the ‘Malabar Coast’.
● The plains along the Bay of Bengal are wide and level.
● In the northern part, it is called Northern Circas, while the southern part is
known as Coromandal Coasts.
● Large rivers such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the
Kaveri form extensive deltas on the eastern coasts.
● Lake Chilika is also located on the eastern coast. It is the largest salt water
lake of India.
Q.7. What is the significance of the Himalayas to India?
Ans. (i) The Himalayas lie on the northern border of India like a physical
barrier. They separate India from Central Asia.
(ii) They have huge cover of snow and glaciers which are the sources for a
number of perennial rivers of India. These rivers helped in the formation of
northern plains of India, therefore provide water for irrigation, navigation and
for generating hydel-power.

(iii) The Himalayas also act as climatic barriers, since they protect the
northern plains in winters from the freezing cold winds blowing from Central
Asia. They are also able to stop and deflect the rain bearing southern-west
monsoon winds towards northern plains of India.
(iv) Forests in the foothills of Himalayas provide habitat for a number of wild
animals, birds, insects, etc.
(v) In Himadari, there are a number of beautiful hill stations like Shimla,
Mussoorie, Nainital, Darjeeling.
(vi) Besides, these mountains also provide a natural protection to India from
any kind of invasion from outside.

