Very Short Answer Questions

Q.1. How many plant and animal species are approximately found in
India?
Ans. Around 47,000 plant species and 89,000 of animal species are found in
India.
Q.2. What does ‘Natural Vegetation’ mean?
Ans. Natural vegetation refers to a plant community which has grown
naturally without human aid.
Q.3. What is ‘Virgin Vegetation’?
Ans. The natural vegetation which has been left undisturbed by the humans
for a long time is called Virgin Vegetation.
Q.4. What do you know about ‘Flora’ and ‘Fauna’?
Ans. Flora: is the term used to denote plants of a particular region or
period.
Fauna: The species of animals found in a particular region is reflected as
fauna.
Q.5. What kind of land is suitable for natural vegetation?
Ans. The undulating and rough terrains are areas where grasslands and
woodlands develop and give shelter to a variety of wild life.
Q.6. What kinds of soils are needed for natural vegetation?
Ans. The sandy soils of deserts support cactus and thorny bushes while wet,
marshy deltaic regions support mangroves and deltaic vegetation and hill
slopes with some depth soil have conical trees.
Q.7. Why are the western slopes of the western Ghats concerned
with thick forests and not the eastern slopes?
Ans. On the western rainy slopes of the western Ghats, forests really appear
as wet evergreen forests and thick as compared to eastern Ghats because
eastern Ghats remain in rain shadow.
Q.8. Which factors are responsible for changes in India’s natural
vegetation?

Ans. Growing demand for cultivated land, development of industries and
mining, urbanization and for grazing of pasture.
Q.9. How is an ecosystem formed?
Ans. All the plants and animals in an area are interdependent and
interrelated to each other in their physical environment thus form an
ecosystem.
Q.10. What are biomes?
Ans. A very large ecosystem on land having distinct types of vegetation and
animal life is called a biome. The biomes are identified on the basis of plants.
Q.11. Which animals are found in Tropical Rain Forests?
Ans. Common animals found in these forests are elephants, monkeys,
lemrus and deer and One-horned rhinoceros.
Q.12. Name the commercially important trees of Tropical Rain
Forests.
Ans. Ebony, mahogany, rosewood, rubber and cinchona are some of the
commercially important trees of tropical rain forests.
Q.13. Give one important characteristic of Tropical deciduous
forests.
Ans. Trees of these forest type shed their leaves for about six to eight weeks
in dry summers.
Q.14. In which regions are moist deciduous forests found?
Ans. They are found in north eastern states, along the foothills of the
Himalayas, Jharkhand, West Odisha, Chhattisgarh and on the eastern slopes
of Western Ghats.
Q.15. What are the important species of moist deciduous forests?
Ans. Teak, bamboo, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair, kusum, arjun and
mulberry are some of the important species of moist deciduous forests.
Q.16. In which regions are dry deciduous forests found?
Ans. They are found in the rainy parts of the peninsular plateau and plains of
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.
Q.17. Name the important dry deciduous species.
Ans. Teak, sal, peepal, neem, are some important dry deciduous species.

Q.18. Name the important coniferous trees of temperate forests.
Ans. In temperate forests, coniferous trees like pine, deodar, silver tree,
spruce and cedar are found.
Q.19. In which regions are Mangrove forests found?
Ans. They are found in the deltas of the Ganga, the Mahanadi, the Krishna,
the Godavari and the Kaveri.
Q.20. What is the chief characteristic of Mangrove trees?
Ans. The chief characteristic is that Mangrove trees can survive both in salt
water as well as fresh river water.
Q.21. What are the natural habitats of lion and tiger in India?
Ans. Gir Forests are the habitat of Indian lion and tigers which are existing in
Madhya Pradesh, Sunderbans of West Bengal and the Himalayan Regions.
Q.22. Name some important birds found in India.
Ans. Some of the important birds of India are peacocks, pheasants, ducks,
parakeets, cranes and pigeons.
Q.23. How many National Parks and Wild Life Sanctuaries are there
in India?
Ans. There are 89 National Parks and 49 wild life sanctuaries in India.
Q.24. Which wild life projects are set up to save endangered
species?
Ans. ‘Project Tiger’, ‘Project Rhino’ and ‘Project Great Indian Bustard’ are set
up to save these endangered species.

