Short Answer Questions

Q.1. What does ‘drainage’ mean? What is a ‘drainage basin’?
Ans. (i) The term ‘drainage’ means the river system of an area.
(ii) Some small streams flowing from different directions come together to
form the main river, which ultimately drains into a large water body. The area
drained by a single river system is called a ‘drainage basin’.
Q.2. From where does the river Indus originate and which tributaries
join the main river?'
Ans. (i) River Indus originates in Tibet near lake &aposMansarovar&apos.
Several tributaries such as the Zaskar, Nubra, Shyok and the Hunza join the
river Indus in Kashmir.
(ii) The Satluj, Beas, Ravi, Chenab and Jhelum rivers join together to enter
the Indus near Mithankot in Pakistan.
Q.3. From where does the river Ganga originate and which
tributaries join it?
Ans. The river Ganga originates from the Gangotri glacier as ‘Bhagirathi’.
Then it is joined by Alaknanda at Devaprayag in Uttarakhand. The Ganga is
joined by many rivers from the Himalayas such as Yamuna, Ghaghara,
Gandak and the Kosi rivers. The river Yamuna originates from the Yamunotri
glacier, but joins the river Ganga at Allahabad. The main tributaries which
come from the peninsular uplands are the Chambal, the Betwa and the Son.
Q.4. Prepare a short note on the ‘Sunderban Delta’.
Ans. (i) The Sunderban Delta is the world’s largest and the fastest growing
delta. (ii) Filled by various tributaries, the river Ganga reaches West Bengal.
(iii) This is the northernmost part of the Ganga Delta. From here, the
Bhagirathi-Hooghly (a distributary) flows southwards towards the deltaic
plains and the Bay of Bengal. (iv) The main stream flows southwards into
Bangladesh and is joined by Brahmaputra, known as Meghna. (v) This mighty
river (with waters from Ganga and Brahmaputra) forms the deltaic plains and
then flows into the Bay of Bengal. (vi) It derives its name from the Sundari
tree which grows in marshland.
Q.5. How does the Brahmaputra river enter India? Which are its
tributaries?

Ans. (i) The Brahmaputra rises in Tibet, near the Mansarovar lake. Then it
flows eastwards, parallel to the Himalayas. On reaching the Namcha Barwa,
it takes a U-turn and enters India into Arunachal Pradesh through a deep
gorge.
(ii) Its tributaries are—the Dihang, the Lohit and Kenula.
Q.6. From where does the river Narmada originate? How is the
Narmada basin formed?
Ans. The Narmada river rises in the Amarkantak hills in Madhya Pradesh.
From here, it flows towards the west in a rift valley. In Jabalpur, it passes
through a deep gorge of ‘marble rocks’. It also forms the ‘Dhunadhar falls’. It
passes through the states of Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat.
Q.7. Prepare a short note on the river Tapti.
Ans. (i) The Tapti rises in the Satpura ranges in Betul district of Madhya
Pradesh.
(ii) It also flows in a rift valley, parallel to the Narmada river.
(iii) Its basin covers parts of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra.
Q.8. What do you know about the Mahanadi river?
Ans. (i) The Mahanadi rises in the highlands of Chhattisgarh.
(ii) It flows through Odisha to reach the Bay of Bengal.
(iii) The length of the river is about 860 km.
(iv) Its drainage basin is shared by the states of Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand and Odisha.
Q.9. From where does the river Krishna originate and name its
tributaries?
Ans. (i) The river Krishna rises from a spring near Mahabaleshwar.
(ii) The Tungabhadra, Koyna, Ghatprabha, Musi and the Bhima are some of
its tributaries.
Q.10. Write down the differences between a delta and an estuary.
Ans. Delta
(i) It is a triangular-shaped piece of land, formed at the mouth of a river,
where it meets the sea.

(ii) With the continuous deposition of silt on its bed, a river goes on splitting
itself into channels or distributaries. They carry river water into the sea.
(iii) Delta shows an extension of land into sea. It is continuously growing
seawards.
(iv) The sea is shallow. Tidal currents are not strong enough to remove
deposits effectively.
(v) The world’s largest and the fastest growing delta is the GangaBrahmaputra delta known as the Sunderban delta. Peninsular rivers like the
Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna and Kaveri also form big deltas.
Estuary
(i) An estuary is an inlet formed generally by the submergence of the mouth
of a river.
(ii) It has a single mouth or channel. It has steep banks or slopes. Where an
estuary is formed, sea is deep.
(iii) Strong tidal waves carry away the little amount of sediments deposited
by a river.
(iv) Estuaries produce an indented coastline and provide sites of natural
harbours. They create conditions for better navigation.
(v) The mouths of rivers Narmada and Tapi present good examples of
estuaries.

