Very Short Answer Questions

Q. 1. What is a group?
Ans. A group is defined as an organised system of two or more individuals who are
interacting and interdependent, who have common motives, have a set of role
relationships and norms that regulate their behaviour.
Example: family, class, playgroup.
Q. 2. How do groups differ?
Ans. Some groups have a large number of members such as a country, some are small
like a family, some are short-lived like a committee, some live together for many years,
such as religious groups and some are informally organised such as spectators of a
match.
Q. 3. Differentiate between groups and teams.
Ans.
Groups
1.

2.

Teams

Performance is dependent Both individual
on contributions of
contribution and teamwork
individual members.
matter
Leader holds
Although there is a leader,
responsibility for the work. members hold themselves
responsible.

Q. 4. What is an audience?
Ans. An audience is a collection of people who have assembled for a special purpose.
For example, to watch a cricket match or a movie.
Q. 5. What are norms?

[CBSE Delhi 2016]

Ans. Norms are expected standards of behaviour and beliefs established, agreed upon
and enforced by group members. They may be considered as a group’s ‘unspoken
rules’. For example, in a family, there are norms that guide the behaviour of family
members. These norms represent shared ways of viewing the world.
Q. 6. ‘Extreme cohesiveness within a group becomes harmful for functioning.’
Explain.
Ans. Extreme cohesiveness may not be in a group’s interest. This phenomenon is
called group think. It is the tendency of decision maker to make irrational and uncritical

decision. It overrides the motivation to realistically appraise courses of action. No one
expresses dissenting opinion because each person believes it would undermine the
cohesion of the group.
Q. 7. Differentiate between ingroup and outgroup.

[CBSE (AI) 2016]

Ans. The term in-group refers to one’s own group and out-group refers to another
group. For in-group members, we use the word ‘we’ while for out-group members the
word ‘they’ is used.
Q. 8. What is group polarisation? Explain with examples.

[CBSE (AI) 2012]

Ans. It has been found that groups are more likely to take extreme decisions than
individuals alone. This is referred to as ‘group polarisation’. For example, an employer is
caught taking bribe or engaging in some unethical act. A group through discussion and
interaction decides to take extreme decisions like terminating his services than a simple
punishment. This is known as group polarisation when a group takes extreme positions
by taking strong decisions.
Q. 9. What is ‘bandwagon effect’?
2014]

[CBSE (AI)

Ans. When you find others also favouring capital punishment, you feel that this view is
validated by the public. This is known as the bandwagon effect.
Q. 10. What is social influence?
Ans. Social influence refers to those processes whereby our attitudes and behaviours
are influenced by real or imagined presence of other people. Parents, teachers, friends,
radio and television commercials create one or other kind of social influence.
Q. 11. Explain conformity.
2015]

[CBSE Delhi

Ans. People conform because:
It allows people to function more smoothly by adhering to group norms.
People behaving in a different way may lead to disapproval.
The norm is seen as reflecting views and beliefs of the majority. Most people believe
that the majority is more likely to be right.
Q. 12. What is compliance? Explain with an example.
Ans. Compliance refers to behaving in response to a request from another person or
group even in the absence of a norm. For example, a member of a community group for
‘Clean Environment’ requests you to put a sticker on your bike that reads, ‘Say no to
Plastic bags’. You agree to do so not because of group norm or because you personally
believe in banning plastic bags, but because you see no harm or problem in putting

such sticker. At the same time, it is easier to say ‘yes’ than ‘no’ to such a harmless
request.
Q. 13. Differentiate between identification and internalisation.
Ans. Identification refers to influence process based on agreement seeking or identity
seeking while internalisation is a process based on information seeking.
Q. 14. Explain the term obedience.

[CBSE Delhi 2014]

Ans. When compliance is shown to an instruction or order from a person in authority
such as parents, teachers, leaders or policemen, that is called obedience. Obedience is
towards authority such as those who possess symbols of status (e.g. uniform, title).
Q. 15. What is social identity?
Ans. Social identity is that aspect of our self-concept which is based on our group
membership. You work hard for your school in your city. The group with which you
identify yourself becomes the in-group and others become the out-group. We start
showing favouritism towards own in-group by rating it more favourably in comparison to
the out-group.

