Short Answer Questions – II

Q. 1. Differentiate between personal self and social self-giving examples.
Ans. Personal self: The biological self (e.g., a child cries when it is hungry which is
based on reflex) modifies itself in context of socio-cultural environment and other
components of personal self-emerge such as personal freedom, personal responsibility,
personal achievement or personal comforts.
Social self: This emerges in relation with others and emphasizes such aspects of life
as cooperation, unity, affiliation, sacrifice, support or sharing. This self-values family and
social relationships. Hence it is also called familial or relational self.
Q. 2. Differentiate between type and trait approaches to personality. Give suitable
examples.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans. Type approaches comprehend human personality by examining certain broad
patterns in the observed behavioural characteristics of individuals.
For example, Type-A personality possess high motivation, lack patience, feel short of
time, are in a great hurry and always feel burdened with work.
Trait approach focuses on the specific psychological attributes along which individuals
tend to differ in consistent and stable ways.
For example, an individual with extraversion traits are active, gregarious, impulsive and
thrill-seeking.
Q. 3. State the characteristics of Type A, Type B, Type C and Type D personality.
Ans. Type A personality possess high motivation, lack patience, feel short of time,
seem to be in a hurry and feel burdened with work. They are susceptible to problems
like hypertension and coronary heart disease.
Type B personality are individuals who have absence of Type-A traits.
Type C personality are prone to cancer. Individual characterised by this personality are
cooperative, unassertive and patient. They suppress their negative emotions such as
anger and show compliance to authority.
Type D personality are people characterised by proneness to depression.
Q. 4. Compare the trait approaches given by Allport and Cattell to understand
personality.
Ans. Allport proposed that individuals possess a number of traits, which are dynamic in
nature. He categorized traits as follows:

a. Cardinal traits: These indicate the goal around which a person’s entire life
seems to revolve. For example, Mahatma Gandhi’s non-violence is identified as
Gandhian trait.
b. Central traits: These traits like warm, sincere, diligent are often used in writing a
job recommendation.
c. Secondary traits: These are least generalized characteristics such as ‘likes
mangoes’ or ‘prefers ethnic clothes’.
Cattell developed a common personality structure on which a person differs. He applied
a statistical technique called factor analysis to discover the common structures. He
distinguished between source traits and surface traits, source traits are stable
andconsidered as building blocks of personality. Surface traits result out of interaction
with source traits. He developed a test called 16 PF (16 Personality Factors) for the
assessment of personality.
Q. 5. Describe the unconscious as described by Sigmund Freud.
Ans. According to Freud, the unconscious is a reservoir of instinctive and animal drives.
It also stores all ideas and wishes that are concealed from conscious awareness
because they lead to psychological conflicts. The sexual desires cannot be expressed
openly and are therefore repressed. People constantly struggle to find socially
acceptable ways to express these unconscious impulses or to keep those impulses
away from being expressed. Unsuccessful resolution of conflicts results in abnormal
behaviour. Analysis of forgetting, mispronunciations, jokes and dreams provide us with
a means to approach the unconscious. The basic goal of psychoanalytic therapy is to
bring the repressed unconscious material into consciousness, thereby helping people to
live in a more self-aware and integrated manner.
Q. 6. How is fixation different from regression?
Ans. Failure of a child to pass successfully through a stage leads to fixation to the
stage.
For example a child who does not pass successfully through the phallic stage fails to
resolve the Oedipus complex and may still feel hostile toward parent of the same sex.
He may consider that men are generally hostile and may want to relate to females in a
dependable relationship.
Regression occurs when a person’s resolution of problems at any stage of
development is less than adequate. In this situation, people display behaviours typical
of a less mature stage of development.
Q. 7. Differentiate between repression and regression.
Ans. In Repression anxiety-provoking behaviours or thoughts are totally dismissed by
the unconscious. When people repress a feeling or desire, they become totally unaware
of that wish or desire. Regression occurs when a person’s resolution of problems at

any stage of development is less than adequate. In this situation, people display
behaviours typical of a less mature stage of development.
Q. 8. What are defence mechanisms? Differentiate between repression and denial.
[CBSE (AI) 2012]
OR
What are defence mechanisms? Explain repression.
[CBSE Delhi 2016]
Ans. Human behaviour reflects an attempt to deal with or escape from anxiety. Freud
described various defence mechanisms which people use to reduce anxiety by
distorting reality. Differences between repression and denial are:
Repression: In this anxiety-provoking behaviours or thoughts are totally dismissed by
the unconscious. For e.g., when people repress a feeling or desire, they become totally
unaware of that wish or desire.
Denial: In this a person totally refuses to accept reality. For e.g., someone suffering
from HIV/AIDS may altogether deny his or her illness.
Q. 9. Explain ego defence mechanisms. Illustrate with examples, the projection as
a defence mechanism.
[CBSE Delhi 2014]
Ans. According to Freud, defence mechanisms are ways in which the ego
unconsciously tries to cope with unacceptable Id desires or impulses. Human behaviour
reflects an attempt to deal with or escape from anxiety. Freud described various
defence mechanisms which people use to reduce anxiety by distorting reality. Defence
mechanisms reduce anxiety temporarily. The optimum use of defence mechanisms is
useful, normal and adaptive but excessive use is harmful which can even lead to
distortion of reality and develop various forms of maladjustment and psychological
problems.In projection people attribute their own traits to others. For e.g., a person who
has strong aggressive tendencies may see other people as acting in an excessively
aggressive way towards him or her. By means of projection an individual.
blames others for his own shortcomings, mistakes, anxiety, guilt, misdeeds.
blames others for his own unacceptable impulses, thoughts and desires.
For example, a student failing in an examination blames either fate for being bad or the
teacher for being unfair.
Q. 10. What are the major criticisms against the psychodynamic theories?
Ans. The major criticisms of psychodynamic theories are as follows:
i.
ii.

The theories are largely based on case studies that lack a scientific basis.
They use small and atypical individuals as samples for advancing
generalizations.

iii.
iv.

The concepts are not properly defined and it is difficult to submit them to
scientific testing.
Freud has used males as the prototype of all human personality development.
He overlooked female experiences and perspectives.

Q. 11. Differentiate between personality inventories and projective techniques.
Ans.
i.
ii.

iii.
iv.

Personality inventories are structured measures. The stimuli in projective
techniques are unstructured and poorly defined.
In personality inventories responses are given on some kind of rating scale,
scored in quantitative terms and on some kind of rating scale, scored in
quantitative terms and interpreted on the basis of norms developed for the test.
Scoring and interpretation in projective techniques are lengthy and subjective.
Personality inventories require the subject to objectively report his/her feelings.
Projective techniques assess unconscious motives and feelings.
Example of personality inventories–Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (EPQ).
Example of projective technique–Thematic Apperception Test (TAT).

Q. 12. Describe the limitations of self-report measures.
OR
Explain any two problems associated with their (self-report measures) use for
personality assessment.
[CBSE Delhi 2015]
Ans. The self-report measures suffer from a number of problems:
i.
ii.

Social desirability: It is a tendency on the part of the respondent to endorse items
in a socially desirable manner.
Acquiescence: It is a tendency of the subject to agree with items/ questions
irrespective of their contents. It often appears in the form of saying ‘yes’ to items.

Q. 13. Define observation. Explain the limitations of observation as a method to
evaluate personality.
Ans. Observation involves employing systematic, organized and objective procedures
to record behavioural phenomenon occurring in a natural situation. This can be
participant or non-participant in nature. E.g., observing mother-child interactions. The
limitationsof the observation method are:
i.
ii.
iii.

This requires a professionally trained psychologist.
The psychologist should be matured to conduct the observations.
The mere presence of the observer may contaminate the results.

Q. 14. Explain the techniques of behavioural analysis used in personality
assessment.

Ans. The techniques of behavioural analysis used in personality assessment are:
Interview: This involves seeking information from a person on a one-to-one basis. This
can be structured or unstructured. For example, an employer selecting employees for
his/her organization.
Observation: This involves employing systematic, organized and objective procedures
to record behavioural phenomenon occurring in a natural situation. This can be
participant or non-participant in nature. E.g. observing mother-child interactions.
Behaviour ratings are used for assessment of personality in educational and industrial
settings. In this individuals are put into certain categories in terms of their behavioural
qualities. These ratings have drawbacks such as halo effect, middle category bias and
extreme response bias.
Nomination: This method is used in obtaining peer assessment. In this each person is
asked to choose one or more persons of the group with whom s/he would like to work,
study, play or participate in a activity. The person may be asked to specify the reason
for his or her choices.
Situational Tests: The most commonly used test of this kind is the situational stress
test. It involves a kind of role-playing in which a person performs a task with other
persons who are non-cooperative and interfering. Thus this test provides us with
information about how a person behaves under stressful situations.
Q. 15. What are behaviour ratings? Give two limitations of behaviour ratings.
OR
Explain behaviour ratings used in assessment of personality.
[CBSE Delhi 2014; (AI) 2014]
Ans. In Behavioural ratings the subjects are asked to put individuals whom they know
into categories in terms of their behavioural qualities. The categories may involve
numbers or descriptive adjectives. Behaviour ratings are used for assessment of
personality in educational and industrial settings. In this, individuals are put into certain
categories or ratings in terms of their behavioural qualities such as strongly disagree,
disagree, neutral, agree and strongly agree. Limitations of behaviour ratings are:
a. A favourable or unfavourable trait forms a basis of a rater’s overall judgment of a
person. This tendency is known as halo effect.
b. Raters have a tendency to place individuals either in the middle of the scale
(called middle category bias) or in extreme positions (called extreme response
bias).

