NCERT Solutions Class 8 Social Science History Our Pasts III Chapter 4 – Free PDF Available
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4 – Tribals, Dikus and the Vision of a Golden Age are provided here. To cover all the syllabus in History, the NCERT Solutions is an essential material as it offers a wide range of questions that test the students understanding of concepts. Our expert personnel have solved the questions with neat explanations. Students who want to score good marks in History, then refer NCERT Solutions.
Students having doubts pertaining to any concept can refer to these solutions. The answers are created by subject matter experts having vast experience in the academic field. Solutions consisting of this chapter are readily made available in the pdf format for free download. Students can refer and easily download the pdf of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History from the links given.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History (Our Pasts-III) Chapter 4 Tribals, Dikus and the Vision of a Golden Age
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4 – Tribals, Dikus and the Vision of a Golden Age
The solutions for Chapter 4 of Our Pasts-III are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 8 for other subjects.
Exercises Page No. 37
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The British described the tribal people as ____________.
(b) The method of sowing seeds in jhum cultivation is known as ____________.
(c) The tribal chiefs got ____________ titles in central India under the British land settlements.
(d) Tribals went to work in the ____________ of Assam and the ____________ in Bihar.
Answer.
(a) The British described the tribal people as wild and savage.
(b) The method of sowing seeds in jhum cultivation is known as broadcasting.
(c) The tribal chiefs got land titles in central India under the British land settlements.
(d) Tribals went to work in the tea plantations of Assam and the coal mines in Bihar.
2. State whether true or false:
(a) Jhum cultivators plough the land and sow seeds.
(b) Cocoons were bought from the Santhals and sold by the traders at five times the purchase price.
(c) Birsa urged his followers to purify themselves, give up drinking liquor and stop believing in witchcraft and sorcery.
(d) The British wanted to preserve the tribal way of life. 
Answer.
(a) Jhum cultivators plough the land and sow seeds – False
(b) Cocoons were bought from the Santhals and sold by the traders at five times the purchase price – True
(c) Birsa urged his followers to purify themselves, give up drinking liquor and stop believing in witchcraft and sorcery – True
(d) The British wanted to preserve the tribal way of life – False
3. What problems did shifting cultivators face under British rule? 
Answer.
British always had problems with shifting cultivators, as they were always moving for pasture lands. The British wanted the shifting cultivators to become peasant cultivators. The British thought it was easier to control and administer peasant cultivators than shifting cultivators. Hence, shifting cultivators faced problems when the company planned the land revenue system.
4. How did the powers of tribal chiefs change under colonial rule?
Answer.
Under British rule, the functions and powers of the tribal chiefs changed considerably. They were allowed to keep their land titles over a cluster of villages and rent outlands, but they lost much of their administrative power and were forced to follow laws made by the British officials in India. They also had to pay tribute to the British, and discipline the tribal groups on behalf of the British. They lost the authority that they had earlier enjoyed among their people and were unable to fulfil their traditional functions.
5. What accounts for the anger of the tribals against the dikus?
Answer.
Tribals were not happy with dikus who were considered as ‘outsiders’ by them. Tribals wanted to be shifting cultivators and not be peasant cultivators. The dikus were settling in at the tribals’ lands, wanting the latter to sell their lands or rent their lands at very high-interest rates. This made the tribals unhappy. Also, the tribal chiefs lost their administrative powers under British rule. Later, the tribals were evacuated from their lands, and they had to look for other livelihood options.
6. What was Birsa’s vision of a golden age? Why do you think such a vision appealed to the people of the region? 
Answer. 
Birsa’s vision of golden age was to have their land free of dikus. He considered that age to be the ‘age of truth’. According to Birsa, in the golden age, the tribal sirdars will be able to rule among themselves and no one will be there to dictate terms to them. His golden age vision was to have an age with no vices like liquor, witchcraft, sorcery and uncleanliness. He did not want any role of outsider participants like missionaries, Hindu landlords, moneylenders, traders and Europeans.
Chapter 4 – Tribals, Dikus and the Vision of a Golden Age Summary
Chapter 4 of Our Pasts-III deals with different categories of people like tribals, shifting cultivators and herders. Class 8 Chapter 4 talk about how the tribals faced problems with the advent of money lenders, traders and Europeans who they considered as ‘Dikus.’ The chapter will also talk about a tribal leader called Birsa Munda, who led a revolt against the dikus, to free the tribal land from their clutches.
The students will also get to know about the following topics:
‘Our Pasts-III’ is an important book for Class 8 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, solutions for the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Social Sciences is available here. Experts have prepared the solutions in an easily understandable language keeping in mind students’ abilities. Students can download the solutions pdf for free from the links given.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4Where can students get the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4?Students can get the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4 from BYJU’S directly. Individual subject-matter experts have created the solutions carefully with an aim to aid students to understand the concepts effortlessly. Further, the solutions are also available in PDF which can be downloaded for free and students can use them to get their doubts clarified. Students can confidently rely on these solutions as they strictly adhere to the latest syllabus and guidelines of the CBSE board.List out the topics and sub-topics covered in Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History.The topics and sub-topics covered in Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History are:
1. How Did Tribal Groups Live?
a) Some were jhum cultivators
b) Some were hunters and gatherers
c) Some herded animals
d) Some took to settled cultivation
2. How Did Colonial Rule Affect Tribal Lives?
a) What happened to tribal chiefs?
b) What happened to the shifting cultivators?
c) Forest laws and their impact
d) The problem with trade
e) The search for work
3. A Closer Look
a) Birsa MundaWhat are the benefits of referring to the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4?The primary benefit of referring to the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4 is that students will become more capable of answering the complex questions. The solutions are well designed by experts in the subject to help students comprehend the chapter thoroughly. Students can get a clear picture of the questions which can be expected in the exam by referring to the solutions regularly. Also, students can complete their revision on time with the help of these solutions PDF available at BYJU’S for free.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4
Where can students get the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4?
List out the topics and sub-topics covered in Chapter 4 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History.
What are the benefits of referring to the BYJU’S NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 4?
