NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Our Pasts – III Chapter 7
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 7 – Civilising the “Native”, Educating the Nation are given here in a comprehensive way. These solutions are extremely helpful for the students to clear all their doubts easily and understand the basics of this chapter more effectively. Students of Class 8 are suggested to solve NCERT Solutions to strengthen the fundamentals and be able to solve questions that are usually asked in the examination.
Students can download the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History PDF below.
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History (Our Pasts-III) Chapter 7 Civilising the “Native”, Educating the Nation
NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 7 – Civilising the “Native”, Educating the Nation
The solutions for Chapter 7 of Our Pasts-III are given below. Students should also check NCERT Solutions for Class 8 for other subjects.
Exercises Page No. 92
1. Match the following:
Answer.
2. State whether true or false: 
(a) James Mill was a severe critic of the Orientalists.
(b) The 1854 despatch on education was in favour of English being introduced as a medium of higher education in India.
(c) Mahatma Gandhi thought that the promotion of literacy was the most important aim of education.
(d) Rabindranath Tagore felt that children ought to be subjected to strict discipline. 
Answer.
(a) True
(b) True
(c) False
(d) False
3. Why did William Jones feel the need to study Indian history, philosophy and law? 
Answer. 
William Jones shared a deep respect for ancient cultures, both India and the West. Indian civilisation, he felt, had attained its glory in the ancient past, but had subsequently declined. In order to understand India, it was necessary to discover the sacred and legal texts that were produced in the ancient period. For only those texts, could reveal the real ideas and laws of the Hindus and Muslims. William Jones believed that only a new study of these texts could form the basis of future development in India.
4. Why did James Mill and Thomas Macaulay think that European education was essential in India?
Answer.
James Mill and Thomas Macaulay felt that the knowledge of English would allow Indians to read some of the finest literature that the world had produced; it would make them aware of the developments in Western science and philosophy. The teaching of English could thus be a way of ‘civilising’ people, changing their tastes, values and culture. They also felt that the aim of education should be to teach what was useful and practical. So, Indians should be made familiar with the scientific and technical advances that the West had made, rather than with the poetry and sacred literature of the ‘Orient’.
5. Why did Mahatma Gandhi want to teach children handicrafts?
Answer.
According to Mahatma Gandhi, education should be all-round, drawing out of the best in child and man, encompassing body, mind and spirit. His beliefs were that literacy is not the end of education and not even the beginning. He thought that literacy is only one of the means, whereby man and woman can be educated. Therefore, he thought that the child’s education should begin by teaching him/her useful handicrafts and enabling them to create something from the moment they begin training. “I hold that the highest development of the mind and the soul is possible under such a system of education. Only every handicraft has to be taught not merely mechanically as is done today but scientifically, i.e. the child should know the why and the wherefore of every process,” quotes Gandhi.
6. Why did Mahatma Gandhi think that English education had enslaved Indians? 
Answer.
Mahatma Gandhi argued that colonial education created a sense of inferiority in the minds of Indians. It made them see Western civilisation as superior and destroyed the pride they had in their own culture. Gandhi thought that there was poison in English education. That it was sinful, it enslaved Indians and cast an evil spell on them. Charmed by the West and appreciating everything that came from the West, Indians educated in these institutions began admiring British rule. Mahatma Gandhi wanted an education that could help Indians recover their sense of dignity and self-respect. During the national movement, he urged students to leave educational institutions in order to show to the British that the Indians were no longer willing to be enslaved.
Civilising the “Native”, Educating the Nation Summary
Chapter 7 of NCERT Our Pasts-III deals with the involvement and interference of the British in Indian Education. The chapter details the views of the orientalists and the anglicists. Students will read about the views of James Mill, Thomas Macaulay at one end, and that of William Jones at the other end. The perceptions of European Education among Indians will also be discussed in the chapter. Leaders like Mahatma Gandhi and Rabindra Nath Tagore shared their opinions and thoughts with the masses against the enslavement of Indians under British education.
The students will also get to know about the following topics:
a. The tradition of Orientalism
b. “Grave errors of the East”
c. Education for commerce
a. The report of William Adam
b. New routines, new rules
a. “English education has enslaved us”
b. Tagore’s “abode of peace”
Our Pasts-III is an important book for the Class 8 Social Science subject. Apart from this chapter, the full set of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 Social Science is given in the linked article.
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 7What are the important questions that students can expect from Chapter 7 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?Here are a few important questions from the examination perspective that students can expect in an exam:
1. Why did James Mill and Thomas Macaulay think that European education was essential in India?
2. Why did Mahatma Gandhi want to teach children handicrafts?
3. Why did Mahatma Gandhi think that English education had enslaved Indians?
To learn the right answers according to the latest CBSE guidelines and marking schemes, students can access the NCERT Solutions at BYJU’S for free.What are the advantages of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 7?The advantages of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 7 of BYJU’S are –
1. All the key concepts are explained in detail using simple language.
2. Provides accurate and precise solutions for all the textbook questions.
3. The solutions can be accessed in both offline and online modes along with a free download option.
4. Apt resource for revision purposes.What are the topics discussed in Chapter 7 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?The topics discussed in Chapter 7 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History are –
1) How the British saw Education
a. The tradition of Orientalism
b. “Grave errors of the East”
c. Education for commerce
2) What Happened to the Local Schools?
a. The report of William Adam
b. New routines, new rules
3) The Agenda for a National Education
a. “English education has enslaved us”
b. Tagore’s “abode of peace”
Frequently Asked Questions on NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 7
What are the important questions that students can expect from Chapter 7 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?
What are the advantages of using the NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History Chapter 7?
What are the topics discussed in Chapter 7 of NCERT Solutions for Class 8 History?
