Chapter 14
NATURAL RESOURCES
Our planet, Earth is the only one on which
life, as we know it, exists. Life on Earth is
dependent on many factors. Most life-forms
we know need an ambient temperature,
water, and food. The resources available on
the Earth and the energy from the Sun are
necessary to meet the basic requirements of
all life-forms on the Earth.
What are these resources on the Earth?
These are the land, the water and the air.
The outer crust of the Earth is called the
lithosphere. Water covers 75% of the Earth’s
surface. It is also found underground. These
comprise the hydrosphere. The air that covers
the whole of the Earth like a blanket, is called
the atmosphere. Living things are found
where these three exist. This life-supporting
zone of the Earth where the atmosphere, the
hydrosphere and the lithosphere interact and
make life possible, is known as the biosphere.
Living things constitute the biotic
component of the biosphere. The air, the
water and the soil form the non-living or
abiotic component of the biosphere. Let us
study these abiotic components in detail in
order to understand their role in sustaining
life on Earth.

14.1 The Breath of Life: Air
We have already talked about the composition
of air in the first chapter. It is a mixture of
many gases like nitrogen, oxygen, carbon
dioxide and water vapour. It is interesting to
note that even the composition of air is the
result of life on Earth. In planets such as
Venus and Mars, where no life is known to
exist, the major component of the atmosphere
is found to be carbon dioxide. In fact, carbon

2021-22

dioxide constitutes up to 95-97% of the
atmosphere on Venus and Mars.
Eukaryotic cells and many prokaryotic
cells, discussed in Chapter 5, need oxygen to
break down glucose molecules and get energy
for their activities. This results in the
production of carbon dioxide. Another process
which results in the consumption of oxygen
and the concomitant production of carbon
dioxide is combustion. This includes not just
human activities, which burn fuels to get
energy, but also forest fires.
Despite this, the percentage of carbon
dioxide in our atmosphere is a mere fraction
of a percent because carbon dioxide is ‘fixed’
in two ways: (i) Green plants convert carbon
dioxide into glucose in the presence of
Sunlight and (ii) many marine animals use
carbonates dissolved in sea-water to make
their shells.

14.1.1 THE ROLE OF THE ATMOSPHERE
IN CLIMATE CONTROL

We have talked of the atmosphere covering the
Earth, like a blanket. We know that air is a
bad conductor of heat. The atmosphere keeps
the average temperature of the Earth fairly
steady during the day and even during the
course of the whole year. The atmosphere
prevents the sudden increase in temperature
during the daylight hours. And during the
night, it slows down the escape of heat into
outer space. Think of the moon, which is
about the same distance from the Sun that
the Earth is. Despite that, on the surface of
the moon, with no atmosphere, the
temperature ranges from –190° C to 110° C.

Activity _____________ 14.1
Measure the temperatur e of the
following :
Take (i) a beaker full of water, (ii) a
beaker full of soil/sand and (iii) a closed
bottle containing a thermometer. Keep
them in bright Sunlight for three hours.
Now measure the temperature of all 3
vessels. Also, take the temperature
reading in shade at the same time.

•

the heating of water bodies and the activities
of living organisms. The atmosphere can be
heated from below by the radiation that is
reflected back or re-radiated by the land or
water bodies. On being heated, convection
currents are set up in the air. In order to gain
some understanding of the nature of
convection currents, let us perform the
following activity:

Activity _____________ 14.2

Now answer
1.
2.

3.

4.

•

Is the temperature reading more in
activity (i) or (ii)?
Based on the above finding, which
would become hot faster – the land or
the sea?
Is the thermometer reading of the
temperature of air (in shade) the same
as the temperature of sand or water?
What do you think is the reason for
this? And why does the temperature
have to be measured in the shade?
Is the temperature of air in the closed
glass vessel/bottle the same as the
temperature taken in open air? (i) What
do you think is the reason for this?
(ii) Do we ever come across this
phenomenon in daily life?

•

•

•

Place a candle in a beaker or widemouthed bottle and light it. Light an
incense stick and take it to the mouth
of the above bottle (Figure 14.1).
Which way does the smoke flow when
the incense stick is kept near the edge
of the mouth?
Which way does the smoke flow when
the incense stick is kept a little above
the candle?
Which way does the smoke flow when
the incense stick is kept in other
regions?

As we have seen above, sand and water
do not heat up at the same rate. What do you
think will be their rates of cooling? Can we
think of an experiment to test the prediction?

14.1.2 THE MOVEMENT OF AIR: WINDS
We have all felt the relief brought by cool
evening breezes after a hot day. And
sometimes, we are lucky enough to get rains
after some days of really hot weather. What
causes the movement of air, and what decides
whether this movement will be in the form of
a gentle breeze, a strong wind or a terrible
storm? What brings us the welcome rains?
All these phenomena are the result of
changes that take place in our atmosphere
due to the heating of air and the formation of
water vapour. Water vapour is formed due to

Fig. 14.1: Air currents being caused by the uneven
heating of air.

The patterns revealed by the smoke show
us the directions in which hot and cold air
move. In a similar manner, when air is heated
by radiation from the heated land or water, it
rises. But since land gets heated faster than
water, the air over land would also be heated
faster than the air over water bodies.
So, if we look at the situation in coastal
regions during the day, the air above the land
SCIENCE

190

2021-22

gets heated faster and starts rising. As this
air rises, a region of low pressure is created
and air over the sea moves into this area of
low pressure. The movement of air from one
region to the other creates winds. During the
day, the direction of the wind would be from
the sea to the land.
At night, both land and sea start to cool.
Since water cools down slower than the land,
the air above water would be warmer than
the air above land.
On the basis of the above discussion, what
can you say about:
1. the appearance of areas of low and
high pressure in coastal areas at night?
2. the direction in which air would flow
at night in coastal areas?
Similarly, all the movements of air
resulting in diverse atmospheric phenomena
are caused by the uneven heating of the
atmosphere in different regions of the Earth.
But various other factors also influence these
winds – the rotation of the Earth and the
presence of mountain ranges in the paths of
the wind are a couple of these factors. We
will not go into these factors in detail in this
chapter, but think about this: how do the
presence of the Himalayas change the flow of
a wind blowing from Allahabad towards the
north?

14.1.3 RAIN
Let us go back now to the question of how
clouds are formed and bring us rain. We could
start by doing a simple experiment which
demonstrates some of the factors influencing
these climatic changes.

Activity _____________ 14.3
•

•

Take an empty bottle of the sort in
which bottled water is sold. Pour about
5-10 mL of water into it and close the
bottle tightly. Shake it well or leave it
out in the Sun for ten minutes. This
causes the air in the bottle to be
saturated with water vapour.
Now, take a lighted incense stick. Open
the cap of the bottle and allow some of
the smoke from the incense stick to

NATURAL RESOURCES

enter the bottle. Quickly close the bottle
once more. Make sure that the cap is
fitting tightly. Press the bottle hard
between your hands and crush it as
much as possible. Wait for a few
seconds and release the bottle. Again
press the bottle as hard as you can.

Now answer
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

When did you observe that the air
inside seemed to become ‘foggy’?
When does this fog disappear?
When is the pressure inside the bottle
higher?
Is the ‘fog’ observed when the pressure
in the bottle is high or when it is low?
What is the need for smoke particles
inside the bottle for this experiment?
What might happen if you do the
experiment without the smoke from the
incense stick? Now try it and check if
the prediction was correct. What might
be happening in the above experiment
in the absence of smoke particles?

The above experiment replicates, on a very
small scale, what happens when air with a
very high content of water vapour goes from
a region of high pressure to a region of low
pressure or vice versa.
When water bodies are heated during the
day, a large amount of water evaporates and
goes into the air. Some amount of water
vapour also get into the atmosphere because
of various biological activities. This air also
gets heated. The hot air rises up carrying the
water vapour with it. As the air rises, it
expands and cools. This cooling causes the
water vapour in the air to condense in the
form of tiny droplets. This condensation of
water is facilitated if some particles could act
as the ‘nucleus’ for these drops to form
around. Normally dust and other suspended
particles in the air perform this function.
Once the water droplets are formed, they
grow bigger by the ‘condensation’ of these
water droplets. When the drops have grown
big and heavy, they fall down in the form of
rain. Sometimes, when the temperature of air
191

2021-22

is low enough, precipitation may occur in the
form of snow, sleet or hail.
Rainfall patterns are decided by the
prevailing wind patterns. In large parts of
India, rains are mostly brought by the southwest or north-east monsoons. We have also
heard weather reports that say ‘depressions’
in the Bay of Bengal have caused rains in
some areas (Figure 14.2).

Fig. 14.2: Satellite picture showing clouds over India.

Activity _____________ 14.4
•

•
•
•

Collect information from newspapers
or weather reports on television about
rainfall patterns across the country.
Also find out how to construct a raingauge and make one. What precautions
are necessary in order to get reliable
data from this rain-gauge? Now answer
the following questions :
In which month did your city/town/
village get the maximum rainfall?
In which month did your state/union
territory get the maximum rainfall?
Is rain always accompanied by thunder
and lightning? If not, in which season
do you get more of thunder and
lightning with the rain?

14.1.4 AIR POLLUTION
We keep hearing of the increasing levels of
oxides of nitrogen and sulphur in the news.
People often bemoan the fact that the quality
of air has gone down since their childhood.
How is the quality of air affected and how
does this change in quality affect us and other
life forms?
The fossil fuels like coal and petroleum
contain small amounts of nitrogen and
sulphur. When these fuels are burnt, nitrogen
and sulphur too are burnt and this produces
different oxides of nitrogen and sulphur. Not
only is the inhalation of these gases
dangerous, they also dissolve in rain to give
rise to acid rain. The combustion of fossil fuels
also increases the amount of suspended
particles in air. These suspended particles
could be unbur nt carbon particles or
substances called hydrocarbons. Presence of
high levels of all these pollutants cause
visibility to be lowered, especially in cold
weather when water also condenses out of
air. This is known as smog and is a visible
indication of air pollution. Studies have
shown that regularly breathing air that
contains any of these substances increases
the incidence of allergies, cancer and heart
diseases. An increase in the content of these
harmful substances in air is called air
pollution.

Activity _____________ 14.5
•

Find out more about monsoons and
cyclones from the library. Try and find
out the rainfall pattern of any other
country. Is the monsoon responsible for
rains the world over?

Fig. 14.3: Lichen
SCIENCE

192

2021-22

people are forced to spend considerable
amounts of time in fetching water from faraway sources.

Activity _____________ 14.6
•

•
•

Organisms called lichens are found to
be very sensitive to the levels of
contaminants like sulphur dioxide in
the air. As discussed earlier in section
7.3.3, lichens can be commonly found
growing on the barks of trees as a thin
greenish-white crust. See if you can
find lichen growing on the trees in your
locality.
Compare the lichen on trees near busy
roads and trees some distance away.
On the trees near roads, compare the
incidence of lichen on the side facing
the road and on the side away from the
road.

Activity _____________ 14.7
•

•

What can you say about the levels of
polluting substances near roads and away
from roads on the basis of your findings
above?

Q

uestions
1. How is our atmosphere different
from the atmospheres on Venus
and Mars?
2. How does the atmosphere act as
a blanket?
3. What causes winds?
4. How are clouds formed?
5. List any three human activities
that you think would lead to air
pollution.

But why is water so necessary? And do
all organisms require water? All cellular
processes take place in a water medium. All
the reactions that take place within our body
and within the cells occur between
substances that are dissolved in water.
Substances are also transported from one
part of the body to the other in a dissolved
form. Hence, organisms need to maintain the
level of water within their bodies in order to
stay alive. Terrestrial life-forms require fresh
water for this because their bodies cannot
tolerate or get rid of the high amounts of
dissolved salts in saline water. Thus, water
sources need to be easily accessible for
animals and plants to survive on land.

Activity _____________ 14.8
•

14.2 Water: A Wonder Liquid
Water occupies a very large area of the Earth’s
surface and is also found underground. Some
amount of water exists in the form of water
vapour in the atmosphere. Most of the water
on Earth’s surface is found in seas and oceans
and is saline. Fresh water is found frozen in
the ice-caps at the two poles and on snowcovered mountains. The underground water
and the water in rivers, lakes and ponds is
also fresh. However, the availability of fresh
water varies from place to place. Practically
every summer, most places have to face a
shortage of water. And in rural areas, where
water supply systems have not been installed,
NATURAL RESOURCES

Many municipal corporations are trying
water -harvesting techniques to
improve the availability of water.
Find out what these techniques are and
how they would increase the water that
is available for use.

•

•

Select a small area (say, 1 m2) near a
water-body, it may be a river, stream,
lake or pond. Count the number of
different animals and plants in this
area. Also, check the number of
individuals of each type or species.
Compare this with the number of
individuals (both animals and plants)
found in an area of the same size in a
dry, rocky region.
Is the variety of plant and animal life
the same in both these areas?

Activity _____________ 14.9
•

•

Select and mark out a small area (about
1 m2) in some unused land in or near
your school.
As in the above activity, count the
number of different animals and plants
in this area and the number of
individuals of each species.
193

2021-22

Remember to do this in the same place
twice in a year, once during summer
or the dry season and once after it has
rained.

•

Now answer
1.
2.
3.

Were the numbers similar both times?
In which season did you find more
variety of plants and animals?
In which season did you find more
number of individuals of each variety?

After compiling the results of the above
two activities, think if there is any relationship
between the amount of available water and
the number and variety of plants and animals
that can live in a given area. If there is a
relationship, where do you think you would
find a greater variety and abundance of life –
in a region that receives 5 cm of rainfall in a
year or a region that receives 200 cm of
rainfall in a year? Find the map showing
rainfall patterns in the atlas and predict
which States in India would have the
maximum biodiversity and which would have
the least. Can we think of any way of checking
whether the prediction is correct?
The availability of water decides not only
the number of individuals of each species that
are able to survive in a particular area, but it
also decides the diversity of life there. Of
course, the availability of water is not the only
factor that decides the sustainability of life
in a region. Other factors like the temperature
and nature of soil also matter. But water is
one of the major resources which determine
life on land.

the water in rivers can be affected is when water
is released from dams. The water inside the
deep reservoir would be colder than the water
at the surface which gets heated by the Sun.
All this can affect the life-forms that are
found in these water bodies in various ways.
It can encourage the growth of some life-forms
and harm some other life-forms. This affects
the balance between various organisms which
had been established in that system. So we
use the term water-pollution to cover the
following effects:
1. The addition of undesirable
substances to water -bodies. These
substances could be the fertilisers and
pesticides used in farming or they
could be poisonous substances, like
mercury salts which are used by
paper-industries. These could also be
disease-causing organisms, like the
bacteria which cause cholera.
2. The removal of desirable substances
from water-bodies. Dissolved oxygen
is used by the animals and plants that
live in water. Any change that reduces
the amount of this dissolved oxygen
would adversely affect these aquatic
organisms. Other nutrients could also
be depleted from the water bodies.
3. A change in temperature. Aquatic
organisms are used to a certain range
of temperature in the water -body
where they live, and a sudden marked
change in this temperature would be
dangerous for them or affect their
breeding. The eggs and larvae of
various animals are particularly
susceptible to temperature changes.

14.2.1 WATER POLLUTION
Water dissolves the fertilisers and pesticides
that we use on our farms. So some percentage
of these substances are washed into the water
bodies. Sewage from our towns and cities and
the waste from factories are also dumped into
rivers or lakes. Specific industries also use
water for cooling in various operations and
later return this hot water to water-bodies.
Another manner in which the temperature of

Q

uestions
1. Why do organisms need water?
2. What is the major source of fresh
water in the city/town/village
where you live?
3. Do you know of any activity
which may be polluting this water
source?

SCIENCE

194

2021-22

14.3 Mineral Riches in the Soil
Soil is an important resource that decides the
diversity of life in an area. But what is the
soil and how is it formed? The outermost layer
of our Earth is called the crust and the
minerals found in this layer supply a variety
of nutrients to life-forms. But these minerals
will not be available to the organisms if the
minerals are bound up in huge rocks. Over
long periods of time, thousands and millions
of years, the rocks at or near the surface of
the Earth are broken down by various
physical, chemical and some biological
processes. The end product of this breaking
down is the fine particles of soil. But what
are the factors or processes that make soil?
•
The Sun: The Sun heats up rocks
during the day so that they expand.
At night, these rocks cool down and
contract. Since all parts of the rock
do not expand and contract at the
same rate, this results in the
formation of cracks and ultimately the
huge rocks break up into smaller
pieces.
•
Water: Water helps in the formation
of soil in two ways. One, water could
get into the cracks in the rocks formed
due to uneven heating by the Sun. If
this water later freezes, it would cause
the cracks to widen. Can you think
why this should be so? Two, flowing
water wears away even hard rock over
long periods of time. Fast flowing water
often carries big and small particles
of rock downstream. These rocks rub
against other rocks and the resultant
abrasion causes the rocks to wear
down into smaller and smaller
particles. The water then takes these
particles along with it and deposits it
further down its path. Soil is thus
found in places far away from its
parent-rock.
•
Wind: In a process similar to the way
in which water rubs against rocks and
wears them down, strong winds also
erode rocks down. The wind also
NATURAL RESOURCES

•

carries sand from one place to the
other like water does.
Living organisms also influence the
formation of soil. The lichen that we
read about earlier, also grows on the
surface of rocks. While growing, they
release certain substances that cause
the rock surface to powder down and
form a thin layer of soil. Other small
plants like moss, are able to grow on
this surface now and they cause the
rock to break up further. The roots of
big trees sometimes go into cracks in
the rocks and as the roots grow bigger,
the crack is forced bigger.

Activity ____________14.10
•

•
•
•
•

Take some soil and put it into a beaker
containing water. The water should be
at least five times the amount of soil
taken. Stir the soil and water vigorously
and allow the soil to settle down.
Observe after some time.
Is the soil at the bottom of the beaker
homogenous or have layers formed?
If layers have formed, how is one layer
different from another?
Is there anything floating on the
surface of the water?
Do you think some substances would
have dissolved in the water? How would
you check?

As you have seen, soil is a mixture. It
contains small particles of rock (of different
sizes). It also contains bits of decayed living
organisms which is called humus. In addition,
soil also contains various forms of
microscopic life. The type of soil is decided
by the average size of particles found in it
and the quality of the soil is decided by the
amount of humus and the microscopic
organisms found in it. Humus is a major
factor in deciding the soil structure because
it causes the soil to become more porous and
allows water and air to penetrate deep
underground. The mineral nutrients that are
found in a particular soil depends on the
rocks it was formed from. The nutrient
content of a soil, the amount of humus
present in it and the depth of the soil are
195

2021-22

some of the factors that decide which plants
will thrive on that soil. Thus, the topmost
layer of the soil that contains humus and
living organisms in addition to the soil
particles is called the topsoil. The quality of
the topsoil is an important factor that decides
biodiversity in that area.
Modern farming practices involve the use
of large amounts of fertilizers and pesticides.
Use of these substances over long periods of
time can destroy the soil structure by killing
the soil micro-organisms that recycle
nutrients in the soil. It also kills the
Earthworms which are instrumental in
making the rich humus. Fertile soil can
quickly be turned barren if sustainable
practices are not followed. Removal of useful
components from the soil and addition of
other substances, which adversely affect the
fertility of the soil and kill the diversity of
organisms that live in it, is called soil pollution.
The soil that we see today in one place
has been created over a very long period of
time. However, some of the factors that
created the soil in the first place and brought
the soil to that place may be responsible for
the removal of the soil too. The fine particles
of soil may be carried away by flowing water
or wind. If all the soil gets washed away and
the rocks underneath are exposed, we have
lost a valuable resource because very little
will grow on the rock.

Activity ____________14.11
•

•

•

Take two identical trays and fill them
with soil. Plant mustard or green gram
or paddy in one of the trays and water
both the trays regularly for a few days,
till the first tray is covered by plant
growth. Now, tilt both the trays and fix
them in that position. Make sure that
both the trays are tilted at the same
angle. Pour equal amount of water
gently on both trays such that the water
flows out of the trays (Fig. 14.4).
Study the amount of soil that is carried
out of the trays. Is the amount the
same in both the trays?
Now pour equal amounts of water on
both the trays from a height. Pour three
or four times the amount that you
poured earlier.

•

•

Study the amount of soil that is
carried out of the trays now. Is the
amount the same in both the trays?
Is the amount of soil that is carried out
more or less or equal to the amount
washed out earlier?

Fig. 14.4: Effect of flowing water on the top-soil

The roots of plants have an important role
in preventing soil erosion. The large-scale
deforestation that is happening all over the
world not only destroys biodiversity, it also
leads to soil erosion. Topsoil that is bare of
vegetation, is likely to be removed very
quickly. And this is accelerated in hilly or
mountainous regions. This process of soil
erosion is very difficult to reverse. Vegetative
cover on the ground has a role to play in the
percolation of water into the deeper
layers too.

Q

uestions
1. How is soil formed?
2. What is soil erosion?
3. What are the methods of
preventing or reducing soil
erosion?

14.4 Biogeochemical Cycles
A constant interaction between the biotic and
abiotic components of the biosphere makes
it a dynamic, but stable system. These
interactions consist of a transfer of matter
and energy between the different components
of the biosphere. Let us look at some
processes involved in the maintenance of the
above balance.
SCIENCE

196

2021-22

14.4.1 THE WATER-CYCLE
You have seen how the water evaporates from
the water bodies and subsequent
condensation of this water vapour leads to
rain. But we don’t see the seas and oceans
drying up. So, how is the water returning to
these water bodies? The whole process in
which water evaporates and falls on the land
as rain and later flows back into the sea via
rivers is known as the water-cycle. This cycle
is not as straight-forward and simple as this
statement seems to imply. All of the water
that falls on the land does not immediately
flow back into the sea. Some of it seeps into
the soil and becomes part of the underground
reservoir of fresh-water. Some of this
underground water finds its way to the
surface through springs. Or we bring it to
the surface for our use through wells or tubewells. Water is also used by terrestrial animals
and plants for various life-processes
(Fig. 14.5).

Fig. 14.5: Water-cycle in nature

Let us look at another aspect of what
happens to water during the water-cycle. As
you know, water is capable of dissolving a
large number of substances. As water flows
through or over rocks containing soluble
minerals, some of them get dissolved in the
NATURAL RESOURCES

water. Thus rivers carry many nutrients from
the land to the sea, and these are used by
the marine organisms.

14.4.2 THE NITROGEN-CYCLE
Nitrogen gas makes up 78% of our
atmosphere and nitrogen is also a part of
many molecules essential to life like proteins,
nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and some
vitamins. Nitrogen is found in other
biologically important compounds such as
alkaloids and urea too. Nitrogen is thus an
essential nutrient for all life-forms and life
would be simple if all these life-forms could
use the atmospheric nitrogen directly.
However, other than a few forms of bacteria,
life-forms are not able to convert the
comparatively inert nitrogen molecule into
forms like nitrates and nitrites which can be
taken up and used to make the required
molecules. These ‘nitrogen-fixing’ bacteria
may be free-living or be associated with some
species of dicot plants. Most commonly, the
nitrogen-fixing bacteria are found in the roots
of legumes (generally the plants which give
us pulses) in special structures called rootnodules. Other than these bacteria, the only
other manner in which the nitrogen molecule
is converted to nitrates and nitrites is by a
physical process. During lightning, the high
temperatures and pressures created in the
air convert nitrogen into oxides of nitrogen.
These oxides dissolve in water to give nitric
and nitrous acids and fall on land along with
rain. These are then utilised by various lifeforms.
What happens to the nitrogen once it is
converted into forms that can be taken up
and used to make nitrogen-containing
molecules? Plants generally take up nitrates
and nitrites and convert them into amino
acids which are used to make proteins. Some
other biochemical pathways are used to make
the other complex compounds containing
nitrogen. These proteins and other complex
compounds are subsequently consumed by
animals. Once the animal or the plant dies,
other bacteria in the soil convert the various
compounds of nitrogen back into nitrates and
197

2021-22

Fig.14.6: Nitrogen-cycle in nature

nitrites. A different type of bacteria converts
the nitrates and nitrites into elemental
nitrogen. Thus, there is a nitrogen-cycle in
nature in which nitrogen passes from its
elemental form in the atmosphere into simple
molecules in the soil and water, which get
converted to more complex molecules in living
beings and back again to the simple nitrogen
molecule in the atmosphere.

14.4.3 THE CARBON-CYCLE
Carbon is found in various forms on the
Earth. It occurs in the elemental form as
diamonds and graphite. In the combined
state, it is found as carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, as carbonate and hydrogencarbonate salts in various minerals, while all
life-forms are based on carbon-containing
molecules like proteins, carbohydrates, fats,

nucleic acids and vitamins. The endoskeletons
and exoskeletons of various animals are also
formed from carbonate salts. Carbon is
incorporated into life-forms through the basic
process of photosynthesis which is performed
in the presence of Sunlight by all life-forms that
contain chlorophyll. This process converts
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere or
dissolved in water into glucose molecules.
These glucose molecules are either converted
into other substances or used to provide
energy for the synthesis of other biologically
important molecules (Fig. 14.7).
The utilisation of glucose to provide energy
to living things involves the process of
respiration in which oxygen may or may not
be used to convert glucose back into carbon
dioxide. This carbon dioxide then goes back
into the atmosphere. Another process that
SCIENCE

198

2021-22

Fig. 14.7: Carbon-cycle in nature

adds to the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
is the process of combustion where fuels are
burnt to provide energy for various needs like
heating, cooking, transportation and
industrial processes. In fact, the percentage
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is said
to have doubled since the industrial
revolution when human beings started
burning fossil fuels on a very large scale.
Carbon, like water, is thus cycled repeatedly
through different forms by the various
physical and biological activities.

14.4.3 (i) THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
Recall the reading taken by you under (iii) in
Activity 14.1. Heat is trapped by glass, and
hence the temperature inside a glass
enclosure will be much higher than the
surroundings. This phenomenon was used
to create an enclosure where tropical plants
NATURAL RESOURCES

could be kept warm during the winters in
colder climates. Such enclosures are called
greenhouses. Greenhouses have also lent their
name to an atmospheric phenomenon. Some
gases prevent the escape of heat from the
Earth. An increase in the percentage of such
gases in the atmosphere would cause the
average temperatures to increase world-wide
and this is called the greenhouse effect. Carbon
dioxide is one of the greenhouse gases. An
increase in the carbon dioxide content in the
atmosphere would cause more heat to be
retained by the atmosphere and lead to global
warming.

Activity ___________ 14.12
•
•

Find out what the consequences of
global warming would be.
Also, find out the names of some other
greenhouse gases.
199

2021-22

14.4.4 THE OXYGEN-CYCLE
Oxygen is a very abundant element on our
Earth. It is found in the elemental form in
the atmosphere to the extent of 21%. It also
occurs extensively in the combined form in
the Earth’s crust as well as also in the air in
the form of carbon dioxide. In the crust, it is
found as the oxides of most metals and
silicon, and also as carbonate, sulphate,
nitrate and other minerals. It is also an
essential component of most biological
molecules like carbohydrates, proteins,
nucleic acids and fats (or lipids).
But when we talk of the oxygen-cycle, we
are mainly referring to the cycle that
maintains the levels of oxygen in the
atmosphere. Oxygen from the atmosphere is
used up in three processes, namely
combustion, respiration and in the formation
of oxides of nitrogen. Oxygen is returned to
the atmosphere in only one major process,
that is, photosynthesis. And this forms the
broad outline of the oxygen-cycle in nature
(Fig. 14.8).

bacteria, are poisoned by elemental oxygen.
In fact, even the process of nitrogen-fixing by
bacteria does not take place in the presence
of oxygen.

14.5 Ozone Layer
Elemental oxygen is normally found in the
form of a diatomic molecule. However, in the
upper reaches of the atmosphere, a molecule
containing three atoms of oxygen is found.
This would mean a formula of O3 and this is
called ozone. Unlike the normal diatomic
molecule of oxygen, ozone is poisonous and
we are lucky that it is not stable nearer to
the Earth’s surface. But it performs an
essential function where it is found. It absorbs
harmful radiations from the Sun. This
prevents those harmful radiations from
reaching the surface of the Earth where they
may damage many forms of life.
Recently it was discovered that this ozone
layer was getting depleted. Various man-made
compounds like CFCs (carbon compounds
having both fluorine and chlorine which are
very stable and not degraded by any biological
process) were found to persist in the
atmosphere. Once they reached the ozone
layer, they would react with the ozone
molecules. This resulted in a reduction of the
ozone layer and recently they have discovered
a hole in the ozone layer above the Antartica.
It is difficult to imagine the consequences for
life on Earth if the ozone layer dwindles
further, but many people think that it would
be better not to take chances. These people
advocate working towards stopping all further
damage to the ozone layer.

Fig. 14.8: Oxygen-cycle in nature

Though we usually think of oxygen as
being necessary to life in the process of
respiration, it might be of interest to you to
learn that some forms of life, especially

October
1980

October
1985

October
1990

Fig. 14.9: Satellite picture showing the hole (magenta
colour) in the ozone layer over Antartica
SCIENCE

200

2021-22

Activity ____________14.13
•
•
•

Q

Find out which other molecules are
thought to damage the ozone layer.
Newspaper reports often talk about the
hole in the ozone layer.
Find out whether the size of this hole
is changing and in what manner
scientists think this would affect life
on Earth (Fig. 14.9).

uestions
1. What are the different states in
which water is found during the
water cycle?
2. Name two biologically important
compounds that contain both
oxygen and nitrogen.
3. List any three human activities
which would lead to an increase
in the carbon dioxide content of air.
4. What is the greenhouse effect?
5. What are the two forms of
oxygen found in the atmosphere?

What
you have
learnt
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

Life on Earth depends on resources like soil, water and air,
and energy from the Sun.
Uneven heating of air over land and water-bodies causes winds.
Evaporation of water from water -bodies and subsequent
condensation give us rain.
Rainfall patterns depend on the prevailing wind patterns in an
area.
Various nutrients are used again and again in a cyclic fashion.
This leads to a certain balance between the various components
of the biosphere.
Pollution of air, water and soil affect the quality of life and
harm the biodiversity.
We need to conserve our natural resources and use them in a
sustainable manner.

Exercises
1.
2.
3.
4.

Why is the atmosphere essential for life?
Why is water essential for life?
How are living organisms dependent on the soil? Are organisms
that live in water totally independent of soil as a resource?
You have seen weather reports on television and in newspapers.
How do you think we are able to predict the weather?

NATURAL RESOURCES

201

2021-22

5.

6.

We know that many human activities lead to increasing
levels of pollution of the air, water-bodies and soil. Do you
think that isolating these activities to specific and limited
areas would help in reducing pollution?
Write a note on how forests influence the quality of our air,
soil and water resources.

SCIENCE

202

2021-22

