Chapter 13
WHY DO WE FALL ILL?
Activity _____________ 13.1
•

•

•

•

We have all heard of the earthquakes in
Latur, Bhuj, Kashmir etc. or the cyclones
that lashed the coastal regions. Think
of as many different ways as possible in
which people’s health would be affected
by such a disaster if it took place in our
neighbourhood.
How many of these ways we can think of
are events that would occur when the
disaster is actually happening?
How many of these health-related events
would happen long after the actual
disaster, but would still be because of the
disaster?
Why would one effect on health fall into
the first group, and why would another
fall into the second group?

When we do this exercise, we realise that
health and disease in human communities
are very complex issues, with many
interconnected causes. We also realise that
the ideas of what ‘health’ and ‘disease’ mean
are themselves very complicated. When we
ask what causes diseases and how we prevent
them, we have to begin by asking what these
notions mean.
We have seen that cells are the basic units
of organisms. Cells are made of a variety of
chemical substances–proteins, carbo-hydrates,
fats or lipids, and so on. Cell is a dynamic place.
Something or the other is always happening
inside them. Complex reactions and repair goes
on inside cells. New cells are being made. In
our organs or tissues, there are various
specialised activities going on– the heart is
beating, the lungs are breathing, the kidney
is filtering urine, the brain is thinking.
All these activities are interconnected. For
example, if the kidneys are not filtering urine,

poisonous substances will accumulate. Under
such conditions, the brain will not be able to
think properly. For all these interconnected
activities, energy and raw material are needed.
Food is a necessity for cell and tissue functions.
Anything that prevents proper functioning of
cells and tissues will lead to a lack of proper
activity of the body.
It is in this context that we will look at the
notions of health and disease.

13.1 Health and its Failure
13.1.1 THE

SIGNIFICANCE OF ‘HEALTH’

We have heard the word ‘health’ used quite
frequently. We use it ourselves as well, when
we say things like ‘my grandmother’s health
is not good’. Our teachers use it when they
scold us saying ‘this is not a healthy attitude’.
What does the word ‘health’ mean?
If we think about it, we realise that it
always implies the idea of ‘being well’. We can
think of this well-being as ef fective
functioning. For our grandmothers, being able
to go out to the market or to visit neighbours
is ‘being well’, and not being able to do such
things is ‘poor health’. Being interested in
following the teaching in the classroom so that
we can understand the world is called a
‘healthy attitude’; while not being interested
is called the opposite. ‘Health’ is therefore a
state of being well enough to function well
physically, mentally and socially.

13.1.2 PERSONAL AND COMMUNITY ISSUES
BOTH MATTER FOR HEALTH

If health means a state of physical, mental and
social well-being, it cannot be something that

2021-22

each one of us can achieve entirely on our own.
The health of all organisms will depend on
their surroundings or their environment. The
environment includes the physical
environment. So, for example, health is at risk
in a cyclone in many ways.
Human beings live in societies. Our social
environment, therefore, is an important factor
in our individual health. We live in villages,
towns or cities. In such places, even our
physical environment is decided by our social
environment.
Consider what would happen if no agency
is ensuring that garbage is collected and
disposed. What would happen if no one takes
responsibility for clearing the drains and
ensuring that water does not collect in the
streets or open spaces?
So, if there is a great deal of garbage
thrown in our streets, or if there is open drainwater lying stagnant around where we live,
the possibility of poor health increases.
Therefore, public cleanliness is important for
individual health.

Activity _____________ 13.2
•

•

Find out what provisions are made by
your local authority (panchayat/
municipal corporation) for the supply
of clean drinking water.
Are all the people in your locality able
to access this?

Activity _____________ 13.3
•

•
•
•

Find out how your local authority
manages the solid waste generated in
your neighbourhood.
Are these measures adequate?
If not, what improvements would you
suggest?
What could your family do to reduce
the amount of solid waste generated
during a day/week?

We need food to be healthy, and this food
will have to be earned by doing work. For this,
the opportunity to do work has to be available.
We need to be happy in order to be truly
healthy, and if we mistreat each other and are
afraid of each other, we cannot be happy or

healthy. Social equality and harmony are
therefore necessary for individual health. We
can think of many other such examples of
connections between community issues and
individual health.
The Five ‘F’s — What is to be done?
Protect the water source (H)
Treat and store water
safely (S)
Wash hands before preparing and
taking food (H)
Wash hands after defecation (S)

Cover the food (H)
Control flies (S)
Faecal matter

Healthy person

Clean vegetables and fruits before
use (H)
Avoid open defecation (S)

Proper drainage system (H)
Treatment of water (S)

Hygiene
Sanitation

Prevention of Transmission of Diseases by Maintaining
Sanitation and Hygiene

13.1.3 DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN ‘HEALTHY’
AND ‘DISEASE-FREE’
If this is what we mean by ‘health’, what do we
mean by ‘disease’? The word is actually selfexplanatory – we can think of it as ‘disease’ –
disturbed ease. Disease, in other words,
literally means being uncomfortable. However,
the word is used in a more limited meaning.
We talk of disease when we can find a specific
and particular cause for discomfort. This does
not mean that we have to know the absolute
final cause; we can say that someone is
suffering from diarrhoea without knowing
exactly what has caused the loose motions.
We can now easily see that it is possible to
be in poor health without actually suffering
from a particular disease. Simply not being
diseased is not the same as being healthy.
‘Good health’ for a dancer may mean being
able to stretch his body into difficult but
graceful positions. On the other hand, good
health for a musician may mean having enough
breathing capacity in his/her lungs to control
the notes from his/her flute. To have the
opportunity to realise the unique potential in
all of us is also necessary for real health.
177

WHY DO WE FALL ILL?

2021-22

So, we can be in poor health without there
being a simple cause in the form of an
identifiable disease. This is the reason why,
when we think about health, we think about
societies and communities. On the other
hand, when we think about disease, we think
about individual sufferers.

Q

uestions
1. State any two conditions essential
for good health.
2. State any two conditions essential
for being free of disease.
3. Are the answers to the above
questions necessarily the same or
different? Why?

13.2 Disease and Its Causes
13.2.1 WHAT DOES DISEASE LOOK LIKE?
Let us now think a little more about
diseases. In the first place, how do we know
that there is a disease? In other words, how
do we know that there is something wrong
with the body? There are many tissues in
the body, as we have seen in Chapter 6.
These tissues make up physiological
systems or organ systems that carry out
body functions. Each of the organ systems
has specific organs as its parts, and it has
particular functions. So, the digestive
system has the stomach and intestines, and
it helps to digest food taken in from outside
the body. The musculoskeletal system,
which is made up of bones and muscles,
holds the body parts together and helps the
body move.
When there is a disease, either the
functioning of one or more systems of the body
will change for the worse. These changes give
rise to symptoms and signs of disease.
Symptoms of disease are the things we feel as
being ‘wrong’. So we have a headache, we have
cough, we have loose motions, we have a
wound with pus; these are all symptoms.
These indicate that there may be a disease, but
they don’t indicate what the disease is. For
example, a headache may mean just

examination stress or, very rarely, it may
mean meningitis, or any one of a dozen
different diseases.
Signs of disease are what physicians will
look for on the basis of the symptoms. Signs
will give a little more definite indication of the
presence of a particular disease. Physicians will
also get laboratory tests done to pinpoint the
disease further.

13.2.2 ACUTE AND CHRONIC DISEASES
The manifestations of disease will be different
depending on a number of factors. Some
diseases last for only very short periods of time,
and these are called acute diseases. We all know
from experience that the common cold lasts
only a few days. Other ailments can last for a
long time, even as much as a lifetime, and are
called chronic diseases. An example is the
infection causing elephantiasis, which is very
common in some parts of India.

Activity _____________ 13.4
•

•
•
•

Survey your neighbourhood to find out:
(1) how many people suffered from
acute diseases during the last
three months,
(2) how many people developed
chronic diseases during this same
period,
(3) and finally, the total number of
people suffering from chronic
diseases in your neighbourhood.
Are the answers to questions (1) and
(2) different?
Are the answers to questions (2) and
(3) different?
What do you think could be the
reason for these differences? What do
you think would be the effect of these
differences on the general health of
the population?

13.2.3 C HRONIC

DISEASES AND POOR

HEALTH

Acute and chronic diseases have different
effects on our health. Any disease that causes
poor functioning of some part of the body will
affect our health. This is because all functions
of the body are necessary for being healthy.

178

SCIENCE

2021-22

But an acute disease, which is over very soon,
will not have time to cause major effects on
general health, while a chronic disease will do
so.
As an example, think about a cough and
cold, which all of us have from time to time.
Most of us get better and become well within a
week or so. And there are no lasting effects on
our health. But if we get infected with a chronic
disease such as tuberculosis of the lungs, then
being ill over the years does make us lose
weight and feel tired all the time.
We may not go to school for a few days if
we have an acute disease. But a chronic
disease will make it difficult for us to follow
what is being taught in school and reduce our
ability to learn. In other words, we are likely
to have prolonged general poor health if we
have a chronic disease. Chronic diseases
therefore, have very drastic long-term effects
on people’s health as compared to acute
diseases.

13.2.4 CAUSES OF DISEASES
What causes disease? When we think about
causes of diseases, we must remember that
there are many levels of such causes. Let us
look at an example. If there is a baby suffering
from loose motions, we can say that the cause
of the loose motions is probably an infection.
But the next question is – where did the
infection come from? Suppose we find that the
infection came through unclean drinking
water. But many babies must have had this
unclean drinking water. So, why is it that one
baby developed loose motions when the other
babies did not?
One reason might be that this baby is not
healthy. As a result, it might be more likely to
have disease when exposed to risk, whereas
healthier babies would not. Why is the baby
not healthy? Perhaps because it is not well
nourished and does not get enough food. So,
lack of good nourishment becomes a second
cause of the disease. Further, why is the baby
not well nourished? Perhaps because it is from
a household which is poor.
It is also possible that the baby has some
genetic difference that makes it more likely to
suffer from loose motions when exposed to a
pathogen. Without the pathogen, the genetic

difference or the poor nourishment alone
would not lead to loose motions. But they do
become contributory causes of the disease.
Why was there no clean drinking water for
the baby? Perhaps because the public services
are poor where the baby’s family lives. So,
poverty or lack of public services become third
cause of the baby’s disease.
It will now be obvious that all diseases will
have immediate causes and contributory
causes. Also, most diseases will have many
causes, rather than one single cause.

13.2.5 INFECTIOUS AND NON-INFECTIOUS
CAUSES

As we have seen, it is important to keep public
health and community health factors in mind
when we think about causes of diseases. We
can take that approach a little further. It is
useful to think of the immediate causes of
disease as belonging to two distinct types. One
group of causes is the infectious agents,
mostly micr obes or micro-organisms.
Diseases where microbes are the immediate
causes are called infectious diseases. This is
because the microbes can spread in the
community, and the diseases they cause will
spread with them.
Things to ponder
1. Do all diseases spread to people
coming in contact with a sick person?
2. What are the diseases that are not
spreading?
3. How would a person develop those
diseases that don’t spread by contact
with a sick person?
On the other hand, there are also diseases
that are not caused by infectious agents. Their
causes vary, but they are not external causes
like microbes that can spread in the
community. Instead, these are mostly internal,
non-infectious causes.
For example, some cancers are caused by
genetic abnormalities. High blood pressure
can be caused by excessive weight and lack
of exercise. You can think of many other
diseases where the immediate causes will not
be infectious.
179

WHY DO WE FALL ILL?

2021-22

Peptic ulcers and the Nobel prize
For many years, everybody used to think
that peptic ulcers, which cause acidity–
related pain and bleeding in the stomach
and duodenum, were because of lifestyle
reasons. Everybody thought that a stressful
life led to a lot of acid secretion in the
stomach, and eventually caused peptic
ulcers.
Then two Australians made a discovery
that a bacterium, Helicobacter pylori, was
responsible for peptic ulcers. Robin Warren
(born 1937), a pathologist from Perth,
Australia, saw these small curved bacteria
in the lower part of the stomach in many
patients. He noticed that signs of
inflammation were always present around
these bacteria. Barry Marshall (born 1951),
a young clinical fellow, became interested
in Warren’s findings and succeeded in
cultivating the bacteria from these sources.
In treatment studies, Marshall and
Warren showed that patients could be cured
of peptic ulcer only when the bacteria were
killed off from the stomach. Thanks to this
pioneering discovery by Marshall and
Warren, peptic ulcer disease is no longer a
chronic, frequently disabling condition, but
a disease that can be cured by a short
period of treatment with antibiotics.
For this achievement, Marshall and

Warren (seen in the picture) received the
Nobel prize for physiology and medicine in
2005.

The ways in which diseases spread, and
the ways in which they can be treated and
prevented at the community level would be
different for different diseases. This would
depend a lot on whether the immediate causes
are infectious or non-infectious.

Q

uestions
1. List any three reasons why you
would think that you are sick and
ought to see a doctor. If only one
of these symptoms were present,
would you still go to the doctor?
Why or why not?
2. In which of the following case do
you think the long-term effects on
your health are likely to be most
unpleasant?
• if you get jaundice,
• if you get lice,
• if you get acne.
Why?

13.3 Infectious Diseases
13.3.1 INFECTIOUS AGENTS
We have seen that the entire diversity seen in
the living world can be classified into a few
groups. This classification is based on
common characteristics between different
organisms. Organisms that can cause disease
are found in a wide range of such categories
of classification. Some of them are viruses,
some are bacteria, some are fungi, some are
single-celled animals or protozoans (Fig. 13.1).
Some diseases are also caused by
multicellular organisms, such as worms of
different kinds.

180

SCIENCE

2021-22

Fig. 13.1(a): Picture of SARS viruses coming out (see
arrows for examples) of the surface of
an infected cell. The white scale line
represents 500 nanometres, which is
half a micrometre, which is onethousandth of a millimetre. The scale line
gives us an idea of how small the things
we are looking at are.
Courtesy:
Emerging Infectious
Deseases, a journal of CDC, U.S.

Fig. 13.1(d): Picture of Leishmania, the protozoan
organism that causes kala-azar. The
organisms are oval-shaped, and each
has one long whip-like structure. One
organism (arrow) is dividing, while a cell
of the immune system (lower right) has
gripped on the two whips of the dividing
organism and is sending cell processes
up to eat up the organism. The immune
cell is about ten micrometres in diameter.

Fig. 13.1(b): Picture of staphylococci, the bacteria
which can cause acne. The scale of the
image is indicated by the line at top left,
which is 5 micrometres long.

Fig. 13.1(c): Picture of Trypanosoma, the protozoan
organism responsible for sleeping
sickness. The organism is lying next to
a saucer-shaped red blood cell to give
an idea of the scale.
Copyright: Oregon Health and Science
University, U.S.

Fig. 13.1(e): Picture of an adult roundworm (Ascaris
lumbricoides) from the small intestine. The
ruler next to it shows four centimetres to
give us an idea of the scale.

181

WHY DO WE FALL ILL?

2021-22

Common examples of diseases caused by
viruses are the common cold, influenza,
dengue fever and AIDS. Diseases like typhoid
fever, cholera, tuberculosis and anthrax are
caused by bacteria. Many common skin
infections are caused by different kinds of
fungi. Protozoan microbes cause many
familiar diseases, such as malaria and kalaazar. All of us have also come across intestinal
worm infections, as well as diseases like
elephantiasis caused by diffferent species of
worms.
Why is it important that we think of these
categories of infectious agents? The answer
is that these categories are important factors
in deciding what kind of treatment to use.
Members of each one of these groups –
viruses, bacteria, and so on – have many
biological characteristics in common.
All viruses, for example, live inside host
cells, whereas bacteria very rarely do. Viruses,
bacteria and fungi multiply very quickly, while
worms multiply very slowly in comparison.
Taxonomically, all bacteria are closely related
to each other than to viruses and vice versa.
This means that many important life
processes are similar in the bacteria group
but are not shared with the virus group. As a
result, drugs that block one of these life
processes in one member of the group is likely
to be effective against many other members
of the group. But the same drug will not work
against a microbe belonging to a different
group.
As an example, let us take antibiotics. They
commonly block biochemical pathways
important for bacteria. Many bacteria, for
example, make a cell-wall to protect
themselves. The antibiotic penicillin blocks
the bacterial processes that build the cellwall. As a result, the growing bacteria become
unable to make cell-walls, and die easily.
Human cells don’t make a cell-wall anyway,
so penicillin cannot have such an effect on us.
Penicillin will have this effect on any bacteria
that use such processes for making cell-walls.
Similarly, many antibiotics work against many
species of bacteria rather than simply working
against one.
182

But viruses do not use these pathways at
all, and that is the reason why antibiotics do
not work against viral infections. If we have a
common cold, taking antibiotics does not
reduce the severity or the duration of the
disease. However, if we also get a bacterial
infection along with the viral cold, taking
antibiotics will help. Even then, the antibiotic
will work only against the bacterial part of the
infection, not the viral infection.

Activity _____________ 13.5
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Find out how many of you in your
class had cold/cough/fever recently.
How long did the illness last?
How many of you took antibiotics (ask
your parents if you had antibiotics)?
How long were those who took
antibiotics ill?
How long were those who didn’t take
antibiotics ill?
Is there a difference between these two
groups?
If yes, why? If not, why not?

13.3.2 MEANS OF SPREAD
How do infectious diseases spread? Many
microbial agents can commonly move from an
affected person to someone else in a
variety of ways. In other words, they can be
‘communicated’, and so are also called
communicable diseases.
Such disease-causing microbes can spread
through the air. This occurs through the little
droplets thrown out by an infected person who
sneezes or coughs (Fig. 13.2). Someone
standing close by can breathe in these
droplets, and the microbes get a chance to
start a new infection. Examples of such
diseases spread through the air are the
common cold, coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), pneumonia and tuberculosis.
We all have had the experience of sitting
near someone suffering from a cold and
catching it ourselves. Obviously, the more
crowded our living conditions are, the more
likely it is that such airborne diseases will
spread.
SCIENCE

Fig. 13.2: Air-transmitted diseases are easier to
catch the closer we are to the infected
person. However, in closed areas, the
droplet nuclei recirculate and pose a risk
to everybody. Overcrowded and poorly
ventilated housing is therefore a major
factor in the spread of airborne diseases.

Diseases can also be spread through
water. This occurs if the excreta from someone
suffering from an infectious gut disease, such
as cholera, get mixed with the drinking water
used by people living nearby. The choleracausing microbes will enter a healthy person
through the water they drink and cause
disease in them. Such diseases are much more
likely to spread in the absence of safe supplies
of drinking water.
The sexual act is one of the closest physical
contact two people can have with each other.
Not surprisingly, there are microbial infections
such as syphilis or AIDS that are transmitted

Fig. 13.3: Common methods of transmission of
diseases.

by sexual contact from one partner to the
other. However, such sexually transmitted
diseases are not spread by casual physical
contact. Casual physical contacts include
handshakes or hugs or sports, like wrestling,
or by any of the other ways in which we touch
each other socially. Other than the sexual
contact, the virus causing AIDS (HIV) can also
spread through blood-to-blood contact with
infected people or from an infected mother to
her baby during pregnancy or through breast
feeding.
We live in an environment that is full of
many other creatures apart from us. It is
inevitable that many diseases will be
transmitted by other animals. These animals
carry the infecting agents from a sick person
to another potential host. These animals are
thus the intermediaries and are called vectors.
The commonest vectors we all know are
mosquitoes. In many species of mosquitoes,
the females need highly nutritious food in the
form of blood in order to be able to lay mature
eggs. Mosquitoes feed on many warm-blooded
animals, including us. In this way, they can
transfer diseases from person to person
(Fig. 13.3).

13.3.3 O RGAN - SPECIFIC

AND TISSUE SPECIFIC MANIFESTATIONS

The disease-causing microbes enter the body
through these different means. Where do they
go then? The body is very large when
compared to the microbes. So there are many
possible places, organs or tissues, where they
could go. Do all microbes go to the same tissue
or organ, or do they go to different ones?
Different species of microbes seem to have
evolved to home in on different parts of the
body. In part, this selection is connected to
their point of entry. If they enter from the air
via the nose, they are likely to go to the lungs.
This is seen in the bacteria causing
tuberculosis. If they enter through the mouth,
they can stay in the gut lining like typhoidcausing bacteria. Or they can go to the liver,
like the viruses that cause jaundice.
But this needn’t always be the case. An
infection like HIV, that comes into the body
via the sexual organs, will spread to lymph
183

WHY DO WE FALL ILL?

2021-22

nodes all over the body. Malaria-causing
microbes, entering through a mosquito bite,
will go to the liver, and then to the red blood
cells. The virus causing Japanese encephalitis,
or brain fever, will similarly enter through a
mosquito bite. But it goes on to infect the brain.
The signs and symptoms of a disease will
thus depend on the tissue or organ which the
microbe targets. If the lungs are the targets,
then symptoms will be cough and
breathlessness. If the liver is targeted, there will
be jaundice. If the brain is the target, we will
observe headaches, vomiting, fits or
unconsciousness. We can imagine what the
symptoms and signs of an infection will be if
we know what the target tissue or organ is,
and the functions that are carried out by this
tissue or organ.
In addition to these tissue-specific effects
of infectious disease, there will be other common
effects too. Most of these common effects depend
on the fact that the body’s immune system is
activated in response to infection. An active
immune system recruits many cells to the
affected tissue to kill off the disease-causing
microbes. This recruitment process is called
inflammation. As a part of this process, there
are local effects such as swelling and pain, and
general effects such as fever.
In some cases, the tissue-specificity of the
infection leads to very general-seeming effects.
For example, in HIV infection, the virus goes
to the immune system and damages its
function. Thus, many of the effects of HIV-AIDS
are because the body can no longer fight off
the many minor infections that we face
everyday. Instead, every small cold can become
pneumonia. Similarly, a minor gut infection
can produce major diarrhoea with blood loss.
Ultimately, it is these other infections that kill
people suffering from HIV-AIDS.
It is also important to remember that the
severity of disease manifestations depend on
the number of microbes in the body. If the
number of microbes is very small, the disease
manifestations may be minor or unnoticed.
But if the number is of the same microbe large,
the disease can be severe enough to be lifethreatening. The immune system is a major
factor that determines the number of microbes

surviving in the body. We shall look into this
aspect a little later in the chapter.

13.3.4 PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
What are the steps taken by your family when
you fall sick? Have you ever thought why you
sometimes feel better if you sleep for some time?
When does the treatment involve medicines?
Based on what we have learnt so far, it
would appear that there are two ways to treat
an infectious disease. One would be to reduce
the effects of the disease and the other to kill
the cause of the disease. For the first, we can
provide treatment that will reduce the
symptoms. The symptoms are usually
because of inflammation. For example, we can
take medicines that bring down fever, reduce
pain or loose motions. We can take bed rest so
that we can conserve our energy. This will
enable us to have more of it available to focus
on healing.
But this kind of symptom-directed
treatment by itself will not make the infecting
microbe go away and the disease will not be
cured. For that, we need to be able to kill off
the microbes.
How do we kill microbes? One way is to
use medicines that kill microbes. We have seen
earlier that microbes can be classified into
different categories. They are viruses, bacteria,
fungi or protozoa. Each of these groups of
organisms will have some essential
biochemical life process which is peculiar to
that group and not shared with the other
groups. These processes may be pathways for
the synthesis of new substances or respiration.
These pathways will not be used by us
either. For example, our cells may make new
substances by a mechanism different from that
used by bacteria. We have to find a drug that
blocks the bacterial synthesis pathway without
affecting our own. This is what is achieved by
the antibiotics that we are all familiar with.
Similarly, there are drugs that kill protozoa
such as the malarial parasite.
One reason why making anti-viral
medicines is harder than making antibacterial medicines is that viruses have few
biochemical mechanisms of their own. They

184

SCIENCE

2021-22

enter our cells and use our machinery for their
life processes. This means that there are
relatively few virus-specific targets to aim at.
Despite this limitation, there are now effective
anti-viral drugs, for example, the drugs that
keep HIV infection under control.

13.3.5 PRINCIPLES OF PREVENTION
All of what we have talked about so far deals
with how to get rid of an infection in someone
who has the disease. But there are three
limitations of this approach to dealing with
infectious disease. The first is that once
someone has a disease, their body functions
are damaged and may never recover
completely. The second is that treatment will
take time, which means that someone
suffering from a disease is likely to be
bedridden for some time even if we can give
proper treatment. The third is that the person
suffering from an infectious disease can serve
as the source from where the infection may
spread to other people. This leads to the
multiplication of the above difficulties. It is
because of such reasons that prevention of
diseases is better than their cure.
How can we prevent diseases? There are
two ways, one general and one specific to each
disease. The general ways of preventing
infections mostly relate to preventing
exposure. How can we prevent exposure to
infectious microbes?
If we look at the means of their spreading,
we can get some easy answers. For airborne
microbes, we can prevent exposure by
providing living conditions that are not
overcrowded. For water-borne microbes, we
can prevent exposure by providing safe
drinking water. This can be done by treating
the water to kill any microbial contamination.
For vector-borne infections, we can provide
clean environments. This would not, for
example, allow mosquito breeding. In other
words, public hygiene is one basic key to the
prevention of infectious diseases.
In addition to these issues that relate to
the environment, there are some other general
principles to prevent infectious diseases. To
appreciate those principles, let us ask a

question we have not looked at so far. Normally,
we are faced with infections everyday. If
someone is suffering from a cold and cough in
the class, it is likely that the children sitting
around will be exposed to the infection. But
all of them do not actually suffer from the
disease. Why not?
This is because the immune system of our
body is normally fighting off microbes. We have
cells that specialise in killing infecting
microbes. These cells go into action each time
infecting microbes enter the body. If they are
successful, we do not actually come down with
any disease. The immune cells manage to kill
off the infection long before it assumes major
proportions. As we noted earlier, if the number
of the infecting microbes is controlled, the
manifestations of disease will be minor. In other
words, becoming exposed to or infected with
an infectious microbe does not necessarily
mean developing noticeable disease.
So, one way of looking at severe infectious
diseases is that it represents a lack of success
of the immune system. The functioning of the
immune system, like any other system in our
body, will not be good if proper and sufficient
nourishment and food is not available.
Therefore, the second basic principle of
prevention of infectious disease is the
availability of proper and sufficient food for
everyone.

Activity _____________ 13.6
•

•
•

Conduct a survey in your locality.
Talk to ten families who are well-off
and ten who are very poor (in your
estimation). Both sets of families
should have children who are below
five years of age. Measure the heights
of these children. Draw a graph of the
height of each child against its age
for both sets of families.
Is there a difference between the
groups? If yes, why?
If there is no difference, do you think
that your findings mean that being
well-off or poor does not matter for
health?

185

WHY DO WE FALL ILL?

2021-22

These are the general ways of preventing
infections. What are the specific ways? They
relate to a peculiar property of the immune
system that usually fights off microbial
infections. Let us cite an example to try and
understand this property.
These days, there is no smallpox anywhere
in the world. But as recently as a hundred
years ago, smallpox epidemics were not at all
uncommon. In such an epidemic, people used
to be very afraid of coming near someone
suffering from the disease since they were
afraid of catching the disease.
However, there was one group of people
who did not have this fear. These people would
provide nursing care for the victims of
smallpox. This was a group of people who had
had smallpox earlier and survived it, although
with a lot of scarring. In other words, if you
had smallpox once, there was no chance of
suffering from it again. So, having the disease
Immunisation
Traditional Indian and Chinese medicinal
systems sometimes deliberately rubbed the
skin crusts from smallpox victims into the
skin of healthy people. They thus hoped to
induce a mild form of smallpox that would
create resistance against the disease.
Famously, two centuries ago, an English
physician named Edward Jenner, realised
that milkmaids
who had had
cowpox did not
catch smallpox
even
during
e p i d e m i c s .
Cowpox is a very
mild
disease.
Jenner
tried
deliberately giving
cowpox to people
(as he can be seen
doing
in
the
picture), and found that they were now
resistant to smallpox. This was because the
smallpox virus is closely related to the
cowpox virus. ‘Cow’ is ‘vacca’ in Latin, and
cowpox is ‘vaccinia’. From these roots, the
word ‘vaccination’ has come into our usage.

once was a means of preventing subsequent
attacks of the same disease.
This happens because when the immune
system first sees an infectious microbe, it
responds against it and then remembers it
specifically. So the next time that particular
microbe, or its close relatives enter the body,
the immune system responds with even greater
vigour. This eliminates the infection even more
quickly than the first time around. This is the
basis of the principle of immunisation.
We can now see that, as a general principle,
we can ‘fool’ the immune system into
developing a memory for a particular infection
by putting something, that mimics the microbe
we want to vaccinate against, into the body.
This does not actually cause the disease but
this would prevent any subsequent exposure
to the infecting microbe from turning into
actual disease.
Many such vaccines are now available for
preventing a whole range of infectious diseases,
and provide a disease-specific means of
prevention. There are vaccines against tetanus,
diphtheria, whooping cough, measles, polio
and many others. These form the public health
programme of childhood immunisation for
preventing infectious diseases.
Of course, such a programme can be
useful only if such health measures are
available to all children. Can you think of
reasons why this should be so?
Some hepatitis viruses, which cause
jaundice, are transmitted through water. There
is a vaccine for one of them, hepatitis A, in the
market. But the majority of children in many
parts of India are already immune to hepatitis
A by the time they are five years old. This is
because they are exposed to the virus through
water. Under these circumstances, would you
take the vaccine?

Activity _____________ 13.7
•

186

Rabies virus is spread by the bite of
infected dogs and other animals. There
are anti-rabies vaccines for both humans
and animals. Find out the plan of your
local authority for the control of rabies
in your neighbourhood. Are these
measures adequate? If not, what
improvements would you suggest?
SCIENCE

2021-22

Q

uestions
1. Why are we normally advised to take bland and nourishing food when we are sick?
2. What are the different means by which infectious diseases are spread?
3. What precautions can you take in your school to reduce the incidence of infectious
diseases?
4. What is immunisation?
5. What are the immunisation programmes available at the nearest health centre in
your locality? Which of these diseases are the major health problems in your area?

What
you have
learnt
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Health is a state of physical, mental and social well-being.
The health of an individual is dependent on his/her physical
surroundings and his/her economic status.
Diseases are classified as acute or chronic, depending on
their duration.
Disease may be due to infectious or non-infectious causes.
Infectious agents belong to different categories of organisms
and may be unicellular and microscopic or multicellular.
The category to which a disease-causing organism belongs
decides the type of treatment.
Infectious agents are spread through air, water, physical
contact or vectors.
Prevention of disease is more desirable than its successful
treatment.
Infectious diseases can be prevented by public health hygiene
measures that reduce exposure to infectious agents.
Infectious diseases can also be prevented by using
immunisation.
Effective prevention of infectious diseases in the community
requires that everyone should have access to public hygiene
and immunisation.

Exercises
1. How many times did you fall ill in the last one year? What
were the illnesses?
(a) Think of one change you could make in your habits in
order to avoid any of/most of the above illnesses.

187

WHY DO WE FALL ILL?

2021-22

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

(b) Think of one change you would wish for in your
surroundings in order to avoid any of/most of the above
illnesses.
A doctor/nurse/health-worker is exposed to more sick people
than others in the community. Find out how she/he avoids
getting sick herself/himself.
Conduct a survey in your neighbourhood to find out what
the three most common diseases are. Suggest three steps
that could be taken by your local authorities to bring down
the incidence of these diseases.
A baby is not able to tell her/his caretakers that she/he is
sick. What would help us to find out
(a) that the baby is sick?
(b) what is the sickness?
Under which of the following conditions is a person most likely
to fall sick?
(a) when she is recovering from malaria.
(b) when she has recovered from malaria and is taking care of
someone suffering from chicken-pox.
(c) when she is on a four-day fast after recovering from
malaria and is taking care of someone suffering from
chicken-pox.
Why?
Under which of the following conditions are you most likely
to fall sick?
(a) when you are taking examinations.
(b) when you have travelled by bus and train for two days.
(c) when your friend is suffering from measles.
Why?

188

SCIENCE

2021-22

