High Order Thinking Skills (HOTS) Question
Q.1. What makes smaller cells metabolically more active?
Ans. Metabolically active cells are usually smaller due to higher nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio.
The former will allow the nucleus to have better of metabolic activities while the latter will
allow quicker exchange of materials between the cell.
Q. 2. Write about cellular autonomy in unicellular organisms.
Ans. (i) The cell has complete independent existence.
(ii) All life activities are carried out by the same cell.
(iii) Division of labour is absent.
(iv) The cell depends upon its own internal and intrinsic information.
Q.3. What are the facts which prove that all cells are autonomous?
Ans. All cells are autonomous because of the following facts:
(i) Each and every cell converts non-living materials into components of living matter.
(ii) Each cell builds up its own macromolecules from micromolecules.
(iii) All cells obtain or manufacture food.
(iv) A cell is always building a new structure to
Q. 4. What are the factors which set the limit of cell size?
Ans. The factors which set the limit of cell size or volume are:
(i) Nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio which determines the range of control of metabolic activities by
nucleus.
(ii) Ability of oxygen and other materials to reach every part of cell.
(iii) Ability of waste products to pass to the outside.
(iv) Rate of metabolic activity.
(v) Rate of surface area to the volume of the cell.
Q. 5. What is cytoplasmic streaming? How many types of streaming are there?
Ans. The autonomic movement of the matrix of cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells is called
cytoplasmic or protoplasmic streaming or cyclosis. These are of two types : (i) Rotation, (ii)
Circulation. In rotation, the cytoplasmic matrix moves in one direction around a central
vacuole. In circulation, the matrix moves in different directions around different vacuoles of
the cell.

Q.6. What are the shortcomings of Schleiden and Schwann theory? Who modified it and
how?
Ans. They did not explain the rise of new cells. Rudolph Virchow modified it and stated that
cells arise from the pre-existing cells.
Q. 7. A student collected water sample from water body and took it to the bio lab. There
he observed that it had microorganisms in it. He observed one organism with small
extension whole over the body and one organism with few long extension over the
body. According to above information what extensions are these and explain about it.
Ans. Short extensions are cilia; long extensions are flagella. Cilia are short and numerous.
Hair like cilia beat like tiny oars or pedals. Flagella are much longer, fewer and bring about
whip-like lashing movement.
Q. 8. What do you understand by cellular totipotency? Where it is used?
Ans. Cellular totipotency is the ability of a living somatic nucleated cell to form the complete
organism.
All somatic cells should be totipotent since they carry the full gene complement of the
individual.
Cellular totipotency is being extensively used in:
(i) Rapid multiplication of desired plant.
(ii) Embryo which fail to reach maturity.
(iii) Multiplication of sterile hybrids.
(iv) Production of virus free plants.
(v) Multiplication of products of protoplast fusion.
(vi) Induction and selection o f mutants.
(vii) Development of resistance to chemicals like weedicides.

Q. 9. Why nucleolus is larger in actively working cell?
Ans. Nucleolus are involved in actively synthesizing RNA that ultimately results in protein
formation.
Q.10. A student got injured someday. He took the medicine from the doctor and got
cured. He wonders that how medicine got to know where to act. He asks doctor about
the reason. What could be the possible reason according to you?
Ans. Every cell membrane has some receptor over it, which perceives the drugs and this
stimulate cascade effects in cell and disease is cured.

