Short Answer Type Questions-II
Q. 1. What are the cell inclusions in a prokaryotic cell?
Ans. (i) Inclusion bodies are storage granules which store reserves.
(ii) They are not bounded by any membrane and lie free in the cytoplasm.
(iii) The inclusion bodies are of three types-gas vacuoles, inorganic inclusions and food
reserves.
(iv) Gas vacuoles are permeable to atmospheric gases.
(v) Inorganic inclusions are inorganic granules which take different colour with basic dyes.
(vi) Food reserve are granules with storage of starch, proteins etc.
Q. 2 Give the difference between cell walls of Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria.
Ans.
S. No.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Gram positive bacteria
Their cell wall is single-layered and100200 A thick.
They can be stained by gram stain.
The lipid content of the wall is quite low.

Gram negative bacteria
Their cell wall consist of two layers and
is 70- 120 Å in thickness.
They cannot be stained by gram stain.
The lipid content of the wall is 20-30%

Q. 3. Differentiate between exocytosis and endocytosis.
Ans.
S. No.

Exocytosis

Endocytosis

(i)

Expulsion of materials from the cell
takes place.

In it, cellular active intake of
materials takes place.

(ii)
(iii)

It destroys vesicles.
Primary function of exocytosis is
expelling waste.

It creates vesicles.
Primary function of endocytosis is
getting nutrients.

Q. 4. Give four differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
2004]

[Annual Exam.

Ans.
S. No.
(i)

Prokaryotic cells
True membrane bound nucleus is
absent.

Eukaryotic cells
True membrane bound nucleus is
present.

(ii)

Endoplasmic reticulum, golgi complex,
mitochondria, lysosomes, vacuoles and
ribosomes are absent.

These cell organelles are present in
these cells.

(iii)

Chromosomes formed of DNA is
present in the cytoplasm.

Chromosomes formed of DNA are
present in the nucleoplasm.

Q. 5. Draw sketch of T.S. of a chloroplast and label SIX parts in it.

[KVS 2015]

Ans. Structure of a Chloroplast –

Q. 6. Draw a well labelled diagram of structure of mitochondrion.
OR
Draw a well labelled diagram of mitochondria. [KVS Agra 2017]

[KVS Silchar 2017]

Ans.

Q. 7. Name and write the function of different kinds of leucoplast in plant cell.
2016]

[KVS

Ans. Leucoplasts : They are the colourless plastids and do not contain any pigment. They
usually perform the function of storage of reserve food material. They are classified into
following three types.

(i) Amyloplasts: Amyloplasts are generally found in tubers, endosperms and cotyledons.
They store starch as reserve food material.
(ii) Aleuroplasts: Aleuroplasts are found in the seeds of Ricinus, maize etc. They store
proteins as a reserve food material.
(iii) Elaioplasts: Elaioplasts are found in most monocotyledonous plants. They store oil as
reserve food material.
Q. 8. Plastids are the cell organelles which are found only in plant cells. Name any two
types of plastid and mention the function of each.
Ans. The plastids are flat, circular cytoplasmic cell organelles. Plastids are found only in plant
cells and certain protists. Two types of plastids are:
(i) Chromoplasts: These are the coloured plastids which have the pigment other than the
chlorophyll. These are found in the floral leaves and fruits imparting them different colors for
attracting insects and animals for pollination.
(ii) Chloroplasts: These are the green plastids found in the green parts of the plants. These
plastids are concerned with the manufacture of carbohydrates by photosynthesis.
Q. 9. Write two functions of each of the following- Golgi complex, Endoplasmic
reticulum, plastids
Ans. Golgi Complex: Perform packaging of material and is the site for formation of
glycoprotein and glycolipids.
Endoplasmic reticulum- Synthesis of protein and lipids.
Plastid: Storage of protein, site of photosynthesis.
Q. 10. Mention the similarities between mitochondria and chloroplasts.
Ans. (i) Presence of double membrane envelope.
(ii) Formation of involutions from the inner membrane.
(iii) Both are semi-autonomous.
(iv) DNA is naked in both and both possess 70S ribosomes.
(v) Take part in energy transduction.
(vi) Both of them produce ATP.
Q. 11. List the functions of centrioles.
Ans. (i) Centrioles help in cell division by forming spindle fibres that give rise to spindle
apparatus during cell division in animal cells.
(ii)They form basal bodies which gives rise to cilia and flagella.
(iii) Out of two centrioles in a spermatozoan, the distal one give rise to axial filament or tail.

Q. 12. What is endocytosis? How many types of endocytosis are there?
Ans. Endocytosis is the process of active cellular intake of materials. It involves invagination
of a small region of plasma membrane, forming an intracellular membrane bound vesicles. It
is of two types:
(i) Pinocytosis is a process of intake of droplets of extracellular fluid.
(ii) Phagocytosis is a process of intake of solid particles.
Q. 13. What is the importance of active transport?
Ans. Active transport plays an important role in:
(i) Absorption of most nutrients from the intestine.
(ii) Rapid and selective absorption of nutrients by cells.
(iii) Maintaining a membrane potential.
(iv) Maintaining water and ionic balance between cells and extracellular fluid.

(Any three)

Q.14. What are microbodies? Give any one function of each microbody.
Ans. Microbodies are small membrane bound organelles which utilise molecular oxygen
and take part in oxidation reactions, involved in aerobic respiration. Microbodies are of two
types: (i) Peroxisomes contains oxidases and catalyases enzymes which catalyse the
oxidation and destruction of subtrates respectively.
(ii) Glyoxysomes contains enzymes for 𝛽-oxidation of fatty acids.
Q.15. Distinguish between mitochondria and chloroplast.
Ans.
S.No.
(i)

(ii)

Mitochondria
Mitochondria occur in all the eukaryotic
cells. It does not trap energy.

The inner membranes of mitochondria
are folded into cristae.
(iii)
Pigments are absent in mitochondria.
(iv)
During biological oxidation, energy is released and stored in ATP molecules.
(v)
Thylakoids are absent.
(Any three)

Chloroplast
Chloroplasts are found in green cells
which perform the function of photosynthesis. It traps energy.
Cristae are absent.
Pigments are always present.
ATP is formed in the presence sunlight
by thylakoids.
Thylakoids are present.

