Long Answer Type Question
Q.1. How many types of body symmetry found in animals?
Ans. Body symmetry refers to the similarity with the arrangement of parts on the opposite
sides of body of a three-dimensional animal.
(i)The body of some animals cannot be divided into two equal halves in any plane Such
animals are called asymmetric or asymmetrical e.g., some sponge.
(ii) The body of other animals can be divided into two equal halves in one or more planes.
Such animals are called symmetrical.
(iii) The symmetrical animals may exhibit two types of symmetry-radial symmetry and bilateral
symmetry.
(1) Radial Symmetry: (i) If the body of an animal can be divided into two equal halves by
cutting it in any plane passing through the central axis, it is called radial symmetry. Animals
showing radial symmetry are called radiata. e.g., cnidarians, ctenophorans, echinodermates.
(ii) The body of such animal can be divided into similar left and right halves through one plane
only. Such a symmetry is called bilateral symmetry and such animals are called bilateral.
e.g., from phylum Platyhelminthes to Chordata.
Q.2. How can you group the animals on the basis of their nitrogenous wastes?
Ans. The excretory organs not only removes the nitrogenous wastes but also maintain water
level in the body. On the basis of the nature of the nitrogenous wastes, animals are grouped
into three types-ammonotelic, ureotelic and uricotelic,
(a) Ammonotelic Animals : They excrete nitrogen wastes in the form of ammonia.
Ammonotelic animals lose more water with ammonia from their body. e.g., aquatic animals
such as sponges, coelenterates, crustaceans.
(b) Ureotelic Animals : They excrete nitrogenous wastes in the form of urea. The loss of
water from the body with urea is comparatively less in these animals e.g., cartilaginous fishes,
amphibians and mammals
(c) Uricotelic Animals: They excrete uric acid or its salt, e.g., Birds, Snakes, Lizards etc.
Q.3. Give distinguishing features of Phylum Porifera.
Ans. Phylum Porifera includes the most primitive and simplest animals. They are commonly
called sponges.
(i) They show cellular level of organisation. The cells are almost independent, cooperating
very little with one another in their function.
(ii) The sponges are diploblastic i.e.; the sponges develop from two germs layers called
ectoderm and endoderm.

(iii) The sponges have porous body viz. provided with pores. The pores are of two types:
inhalant pores are called ostia (e.g. ostium) and exhalent pores are known as oscula (e.g.,
osculum).
(iv) The animals possess a large cavity called spongocoel or paragastric cavity. It opens to the
outside by a terminal opening called osculum.
(v) One of the most important features of sponges is the presence of an interconnected
network of channels called canal system. Water enters the spongocoel through ostia and goes
outside through osculum.
(vi) The sponges possess an internal skeleton of calcareous or siliceous + spicule s or
irregular proteinaceous spongin fibers or both located in mesenchyme.
(vii) Asexual reproduction occurs by budding or special cell mass called gemmules or internal
buds. Sexual reproduction involves the formation of ova and spermatozoa.
(Any five)
Q.4. Write a brief note on reproduction of Platyhel – minthes.
Ans. (i) Flatworms are generally hermaphrodite. However, the anatomy of reproduction
system encourages cross fertilization.
(ii) Gonads have ducts which leads to the copulatory organs.
(iii) They are viviparous.
(iv) Life history often includes one or more larva stages
(v) Most of the parasitic forms involve more than one host to complete their life cycle.
(vi) Asexual reproduction by transverse fission occurs in some forms.
(vii) They also have the power of regeneration.
Q.5. Give the salient features of phylum Annelida.
Ans. Salient features of phylum Annelida:
(i) Annelids occur in fresh water, sea water or moist soil. Some are free living, some are
burrowing and a few are parasitic.
(ii) The annelids are characterised by metameric segmentation, viz, the body is divided
externally by ring like grooves, the annuli and internally by transverse septa. The segments
are called metameres.
(iii) They show bilateral symmetry.
(iv) Annelids are triploblastic animals.
(v) They have organ system level of organization.
(vi) Except leeches, unjointed chitinous setae are often present. Some annelids have
unjointed, locomotory structures, the parapodia (para- parallel, podia-feet),
(vii) Circulatory system is usually closed type. Blood is red due to the presence of respiratory
pigment haemoglobin, found dissolved in the plasma.

(viii) Exeretory system consists of coiled tubular structures, called nephridia. Ammonia is chief
excretory waste.
(ix) The nervous system consists of a nerve ring and a solid, double, midventral nerve cord
with ganglia.
(x) Tactile (touch) receptors, gustatoreceptors (receptors of taste) and photoreceptors
(sensitive to light) are usually found. Some forms have statocysts (balancing organs).
(xi) Both unisexual (e.g., Nereis) and bisexual (e.g., Earthworm, Leech) forms are found
(Any ten)
Q.6. Give the important characters of Phylum Echinodermata.
Ans. Phylum Echinodermata:
(i) These animals have an endoskeleton of calcareous ossicles and, hence the name
Echinodermata (spiny bodied).
(ii) The skin forms a hard spiny protective skeleton covering.
(iii) These are sluggish marine forms.
(iv) They usually show a pentamerous radial symmetry.
(v) It is the only phylum in which adults are radially symmetrical while larval stages are
bilaterally symmetrical.
(vi) They have a coelom (coelomata) and well-developed water vascular system or
ambulacral system. Digestive system is complete with mouth an the ventral (lower) side and
anus on the dorsal (upper) side.
(vij) Locomotion takes place by means of numerous hollow tube feet.
(viii) Excretion by diffusion through the body.
(ix) Fertilization is open.
Q. 7. Explain the following in short:

[V. Imp.]

(i) Nephridium,
(ii) Hirudin,
(iii) Parapodia,
(iv) Mantle,
(v) Ctenidia,
Ans. (i) Nephridium: These are delicate, coiled, respiratory units of Annelids. They collect
waste matter from the body cavity and discharge the same into the alimentary canal or outside
the body.
(ii) Hirudin : It is an anticoagulant substance secreted by Hirudinaria (leeches).

(iii) Parapodia : These are paired jointed, leaf like locomotory appendages of polychaetes (a
group of annelids). It helps in locomotion in water and on land.
(iv) Mantle : It is the outer, soft fold which covers the visceral hump of molluscs. It also
secretes the outer shell in them.
(v) Ctenidia : The respiratory organs (gill like) present in mollusca are termed as ctenidia.
Q.8. Define nematocyst, polyp, medusa, mesoglea and planula.
Ans. Nematocysts: It is stinging organ of coelenterates. It is produced inside a stinging cell
called nematoblast or cnidoblast which comprises hypnotoxic fluid and a long coiled tube for
injecting the fluid into prey or predator. It is used as an organ of offence and defence.
Polyp : It is a free living sessile or mobile zooid or individual of a simple or colonial
coelenterate. It is cylindrical in outline with a terminal mouth surrounded by a ring of tentacles,
e.g., Hydra, Physalia, coral.
Medusa : It is a bell-like or umbrella-shaped free floating or swimming individual (zooid) of
coelenterates.
Mesoglea : It is a non-cellular gelatinous middle layer found between ectoderm and
endoderm as in coelenterates.
Planula : This is a free swimming young ovoid ciliated larva of coelenterates. It gives rise to
the adult individual.
Q.9. Enlist the main features of Aschelminthes.

[V. Imp.]

Ans. Phylum-Aschelminthes or Nemathelminth :
(i) They are called roundworms as they appear circular in cross section.
(ii) Free living, aquatic, terrestrial or parasitic.
(iii) Organisation of body is organ level.
(iv) Bilaterally symmetrical animals.
(v) They are triploblastic and pseudocoelomate.
(vi) Alimentation is complete with muscular pharynx.
(vii) Sexes are separate.
(viii) Body is covered bv cuticle.
(ix) Fertilization is internal.
(x) Examples are filarial worm (Wuchereria),
Ascaris, Hookworm (Ancylostoma) and Pinworm (Enterobius) etc.
Q.10. Distinguish between flat worm and round worm.
Ans.
S.No.
(i)

Flat worm
Mostly parasitic but some are free living.

Round worm
Mostly endoparasites but some are free
living.

(ii)

Body dorsoventrally flattened,
triploblastic.

Body bilaterally symmetrical, elongate.

(iii)
(iv)

Acoelomate worms.
Bilaterally symmetrical, excretion by
flame cells.
(v)
They are members of Phylum Platyhelminthes.
(vi)
Mostly hermaphrodite.
(vii)
e.g., Taenia, Fasciola.
(Any five)

P s e u d o c o e l o m a t e worms.
Excretory system is H-shaped.
They are members of Aschelminthes.
Sexual dimorphism is well marked.
e.g., Ascaris.

Q.11. Compare the characters of Chordates and Non-Chordates

[KVS 2016]

Ans.
S.No
(i)

Chordates
A notochord is present at some stage in the
life of chorodates.

Non-Chordates
Notochord is not present at any
stage in the life.

(ii)

Central nervous system is dorsal and hollow.

(iii)

Gill slits are present in the pharynx either in
the embryo or adult.
Tail is present at some stage in the life of the
chordates.
If present RBCs contain respiratory pigment
(haemoglobin).

Central nervous system is ventral
and solid.
Gill slits are absent.

(iv)
(v)

Tail is absent.
If haemoglobin is present, it is found
in the blood plasma. RBCs are
absent.

(Any five)
Q. 12. Classify sub-phylum Vertebrata using flow diagram.
Ans. Flow diagram of classification of sub-phylum vertebrata:

Q.13. Distinguish between:
(i) Bony fishes and cartilaginous fishes.
(ii) Exoskeleton and endoskeleton.
Ans. (i) Differences between Bony fishes and Cartilaginous fishes:

S.
No.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Bony fishes

Cartilaginous fishes
They are called Chondrichthyes.
Their endoskeleton is cartilaginous.
There are about 600 species known.
All are marine forms.

(v)

They are called Osteichthyes.
Their endoskeleton is bony.
There are about 25,000 species known.
They are found both in sea and fresh
water.
They have swim bladder.

(vi)

Gills are covered by Opercula.

They have five pairs of gills. Operculum
absent.

(vii)

E.g., Salmon, Catla, Rohu, Bombay
duck.

E.g., Skates and Rays, Scolidon,
Electric ray.

Swim bladder absent

(Any five)
(ii) Differences between exoskeleton and endoskeleton:
S.No.
(i)

Exoskeleton
It is hard protective covering present over
the body of many animals,

Endoskeleton
It is formed within the body of
vertebrates.

(ii)

It is formed by the deposition of hard
protective material on the surface of body.
Invertebrate's scales, nails, claws and
feathers are exoskeleton.

It is formed of hard bone and cartilage.

(iii)

It helps in protection, has covering
functions, and helps in quick movement.

It forms frame work of the body. It
provides shape and posture to the
body. It protects delicate organs of
body and helps in movement.

Q. 14. Give the salient features of class Cyclostomata.
Ans. The salient features of class Cyclostomata are:
(i) They have long, eel like body with 6-15 pairs of gill slits.
(ii) The skin is soft, smooth, shiny and is without scales and paired fins.
(iii) The exoskeleton is cartilaginous. Notochord persists throughout life.
(iv) The mouth is jawless, circular and suctorial with a tongue bearing horny teeth.
(v) The heart is two chambered-one auricle and one ventricle. Circulation is of closed type.
(vi) The body temperature is variable.
(Any five)
Q.15. Discuss the general characters of class Mammalia?

Ans. (i) They are found in a variety of habitats like Polar ice caps, deserts, mountains, forests,
grasslands and dark caves. Some of them are also adapted to fly or live in water.
(ii) They have milk producing mammary glands to nourish their young ones.
(iii) They possess two pairs of limbs which are adapted for walking, running, climbing,
burrowing, swimming or flying.
(iv) They possess hair on the skin.
(v) External ears or pinnae are present.
(vi) They possess different types of teeth in the jaw.
(vii) The heart is four-chambered. They are homoiothermous
(viii) They respire through lungs.
(ix) Sexes are separate and fertilisation is internal.
(x) They are viviparous with few exception and development is direct.s

