Short Answer Type Question - I
Q. 1. What do you understand by diffusion pressure?
Ans. The pressure exerted by the tendency of the particles to diffuse from the region of its
higher concentration to the region of its lower concentration is called diffusion pressure. It is
proportional to the concentration of diffusing particles.
Q. 2. Define membrane permeability. On what factors does it depend?
Ans. Membrane permeability is the ability of a membrane to allow passage of gases, liquids,
solutes through it. It is dependent upon two factors:
(i) Nature of membrane (composition),
(ii) Nature of passing substance.
Q. 3. What is reverse osmosis? How it is useful?
Ans. It is the expulsion of pure water from a solution through a semi-permeable membrane
under the influence of pressure higher than the osmotic pressure of the solution.
Use: Reverse osmosis is used in removing salts from saline water as well as extra purification of water.
Q. 4. Write a short note on deplasmolysis.
Ans. Deplasmolysis: (i) If a plasmolysed cell is placed in pure water or hypotonic solution,
endosmosis takes place.
(ii) The protoplast attains its original shape and the cell regain its original size.
(iii) The swelling up of a plasmolysed protoplast due to endosmosis under the influence of a
hypotonic solution or water is called deplasmolysis.
(iv) It is possible immediately after plasmolysis otherwise the cell protoplast becomes perma nently damaged.
Q. 5. Briefly describe two pathways through which mineral nutrients absorbed by roots
are carried to the xylem.
[DDE 2017]
Ans. Apoplast pathway : The ions enter the cell wall of epidermis and move across the cell
wall from epidermis to xylem and finally gets accumulated there. Symplast pathway: The
ions enter the cytoplasm of epidermis and move across the cytoplasm of epidermis to
cytoplasm of pericycle through phasmodesmata and finally to xylem vessels.
Q. 6. Differentiate between apoplast and symplast pathway. [KVS Guwahati 2016]
Ans. Difference between apoplast and symplast pathway is as follows:
S.No.
(i)

Apoplast
It is the pathway of water which occurs
through cell walls and intercellular spaces.

Symplast
It occurs through interconnected
protoplasts. The protoplast of adjacent
cells is connected via plasmodesmata

(ii)

The apoplastic pathway is continuous and
provide least resistant to the movement of
water.

The symplastic pathway is slow
because of cell membrane and them
organelles.

Q. 7. Represent diagrammatically the apoplastic and symplastic pathways of water
transport in plants.
[KVS Agra
2017]
OR
Mention the two pathways of water movements in root cells with diagrams. [KVS
2015]
Ans. Two pathways of water movement are apoplastic and symplastic.

