Short Answer Questions
Q. 1. What is the role of sarcoplasmic reticulum myosin head and F-actin during
contraction of striated muscles of hormones. [KVS Agra 2016]
Ans. (i) Sarcoplasmic reticulum: It releases calcium ions into the sarcoplasm that binds to
troponin causing a change in its shape and position and thereby remove the masking of active
sites for myosin.
(ii) Myosin head: The myosin head is an active ATPase enzyme and has binding sites for
ATP and active sites for actin. It binds to the exposed active sites on actin to form a cross
bridge.
(iii) F-actin: The actin sites on the F-actin are specific to the mysoin head for cross-bridge
formation.
Q. 2. Name the following bones: [KVS Mumbai 2016]
(i) Smallest Ear Bone
(ii) Collar Bone
(iii) Knee cap
(iv) Thigh bone
(v) Upper arm bone
(vi) Ist Vertebra
Ans. (i) Stapes
(iii) Patella
(v) Humerus

(ii) Clavicle
(iv) Femur
(vi) Atlas

Q. 3. Describe isotonic and isometric contractions.
Ans. (i) Isotonic contractions: The force exerted on a muscle by lift and load. The muscle
contraction is said to be isotonic (in a constant tension) since the load remains constant
throughout the period of shortening of muscle.
(ii) Isometric contraction: Shortening is prevented by maintaining the muscle at a fixed
length. The development of tension occurs at the constant muscle length. This type of
contraction is said to be in isometric contraction (constant length).
Q. 4. How many pairs of ribs are found and what are they called?
Ans. There are 12 pairs of ribs which form the bony lateral walls of the thoracic cage.
(i) The first seven pairs are called true ribs because their anterior ends are attached directly to
the sternum by means of small pieces of hyaline cartilage, the costal cartilages.
(ii) The eighth, ninth and tenth pairs of the ribs are called false ribs. They articulate by
cartilage which are attached indirectly to the sternum. They are also called vertebrochondral
ribs.
(iii) The last two pairs of ribs are called floating ribs because their anterior ends are not
attached to either the sternum or the cartilage of another rib. The floating ribs protect the
kidneys.
Q. 5. Why movements of internal organs are essential for animals?
Ans. Movement of internal organs are essential for the animals because:
(i) Food and urine are moved forward by the movements of the muscles present in the

digestive and urinary tracts respectively.
(ii) Movements of cardiac muscles enables the heart to receive and distribute the blood.
(iii) Inspiration and expiration involves the movements of the diaphragm, ribs, etc.
(iv) Movements of uterine wall enable the mother to give birth to a child.
Q. 6. Mention the function of vertebral column.
Ans. Functions of vertebral column:
(i) It protects the spinal cord.
(ii) It carries the weight of the body during motion as well as in standing position.
(iii) Anterior cervical vertebrae allow free movement of the head.
(iv) The inter-vertebral discs present in between the vertebral give axial flexibility to the
animal.
Q. 7. Describe the structure and functions of sternum.
Ans. Structure of Sternum:
(i) This is a flat bone which is present just under the skin in the middle of the front of the
chest.
(ii) Its shape is like a dagger and consists of three parts: the manubrium is the uppermost
part, the body is the middle portion and the xiphoid process is the tip of the bone.
(iii) The true ribs (7 pairs) are attached to the sternum.
Functions of Sternum:
(a) It protects the internal organ in the thoracic region.
(b) It also provides the surface for muscle attachment.
(c) The sternum helps in the respiratory mechanism.
Q. 8. What are antagonistic muscles? Write about any one set of antagonistic muscles.
Ans. Muscles which act in opposition to other muscles are called the antagonistic muscles.
One set of antagonistic muscles is:
(i) Flexor: This muscle bends one part of a limb on another at a joint, e.g,, biceps. It bring the
fore arm towards the upper arm.
(ii) Extension: This muscle extends or straightens a limb e.g., triceps. It extends the fore arm.
Q. 9. How are thick and thin filaments arranged in a muscle fibre?
Ans. (i) Myofibril are arranged in sacromeres. The sarcomere is the zone between two Z lines.
A-band is present in centre of sarcomere, near to it is I-band.
(ii) The skeletal muscle has alternate A and I bands.
(iii) These are called anisotropic (dark) and isotropic (light) bands. Z-line lies in centre of Iband but middle of A band is H-zone.
(iv) Sarcoplasm has many thick and thin filaments. H-zone has only thick filaments but I band
contains thin filaments.
(v) The remaining part of A band has both thin (actin) and thick (myosin) filaments.
(vi) The thin filaments have actin protein but thick are made of myosin.

Q.10.From where the muscle gets energy for its contraction?
Ans. (i) Energy released due to breakdown of ATP molecule is used up in the contraction of
muscle.
(ii) This breaking down of ATP takes place in the presence of myosin ATPase.
Image Pending
(iii) There is another high energy compound called creatinine phosphate (CP), present in the
muscle.
(iv) This creatinine phosphate maintains the regular supply of ATP. Creatinine phosphate
reacts with ADP to give rise to ATP and creatinine.
ADP + CP → ATP + Creatinine
(v) When the contraction is completed creatinine is again reconverted into creatinine
phosphate by reacting with ATP to produce creatine phosphate.
Q.11. How does calcium affect the process of muscle contraction? [NCT-2008]
Ans. (i) The sarcoplasmic reticulum releases the stored Ca ++ which binds with the specific
sites present on the troponin component of the thin filament.
(ii) As a result, conformational change occurs in the troponin molecule and the active sites
present on the F-actin molecules are exposed.
(iii) These sites are specific to myosin head which exhibits Mg ++ dependent ATPase activity.
(iv) During the relaxation of the muscle, the Ca ++ is pumped back into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum.
(v) As a result the troponin component becomes free to mask the active sites for myosin head.
(vi) The cross bridge breaks and thin filament occupies its normal position and muscle
relaxes.

