Short Answer Type Question-I
Q.1. Describe the role of haemoglobin in the transport.

[KVS Agra 2017]

Ans. Role of haemoglobin in the transport of of respiratory gases are :
(i) Oxygen binds with haemoglobin to form oxyhaemoglobin. 1 molecule of haemoglobin
carries 4 molecules of oxygen.
(ii) CO 2 binds with haemoglobin to form carbamino- haemoglobin. CO 2 is carried as
carbamino-haemoglobin by blood.
Q. 2. What is intracellular circulation ? Name any two organisms that show this
circulation.
Ans. Practically in all living cells and unicellular organisms (ğ‘’. ğ‘”. , ğ‘ƒğ‘ğ‘Ÿğ‘ğ‘šğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘–ğ‘¢ğ‘š) the cytoplasm
shows streaming movement, called cyclosis. Cyclosis helps in the distribution of materials in
the cells. It also plays an important role in amoeboid locomotion found in certain protozoans
(ğ‘’. ğ‘”. , ğ´ğ‘šğ‘œğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘) and white blood corpuscles.
Q. 3. What is pericardium and how it is helpful to humans ?
Ans. It is two layered sac consisting of outer parietal pericardium and inner visceral
pericardium. in between the two layers, a space called the pericardial cavity is present which
is filled with a pericardial fluid.
Significance: The pericardium protects the heart from shocks and mechanical injuries and
also allows free movement of the heart.
Q. 4. What is an artificial pace-maker and what does it consists of ?
Ans. An artificial pace-maker is an electronic device which regularly sends small amount of
electrical charges that stimulate the heart. The artificial pacemaker consists of (i) a pulsegenerator containing cell (solid state lithium cell) to produce electrical impulse, (ii) the lead in
the form of a wire which transmits the impulse and (iii) an electrode, which is connected to
the portion of the heart where impulse is to be transmitted.
Q. 5. While blood of earthworm and human being is red in colour, even then they are
considered different. How ?
Ans. This difference is due to the location of hemoglobin as. In earthworm, it is present in
dissolved form in plasma whereas in humans, in it is present in R.B.Cs.
Q. 6. From which cells do platelets originate ? What is their life span ? How do they act
when blood vessels get injured ?
Ans. Platelets are produced from megakaryocytes present in the bone marrow. The life span
of platelets is 3 to 7 days only. When an injury is caused the blood platelets disintegrate and
release certain chemical called the platelet factors which help in the clotting of blood.

Q. 7. Name a substances that prevent the blood coagulation in uninjured blood vessels
? How do they act ?
Ans. (i) The anticoagulant heparin prevent the blood from clotting.
(ii) The uninjured platelets don't form thromboplastin.
Q. 8. What is systemic circulation ?
Ans. The circulation of blood between heart and body is called systemic circulation.
The left ventricle pumps the oxygenated blood into aorta which gives off arteries to all parts
of the body except lungs.
Q. 9. What are the causative factors of hypertension ?
Ans. (i) A diet full of extremely oily and greasy products, is known to increase cholesterol
level, causing thickening of the arteries which result in high blood pressure.
(ii) Tobacco smoking also speeds up the heart rate, contracts blood vessels and raises blood
pressure.
(iii) Mental tension is also one of the main cause of hypertension.
Q. 10. What is cardiac output ?

[NCT-2007]

Ans. The amount of blood pumped by heart per minute is called cardiac output or heart
output. Heart of normal person beats 72 times per minute and pumps out about 70 milli litres
of blood per beat. Thus the cardiac output is 72 x 70 or 5040 milli litres per minute. i.e., about
5 litres per minute.
Q. 11. What is stroke volume ? How is it related to cardiac output ?

(DDE 2017)

Ans. During cardiac cycle or one heart beat, the volume of blood pumped by the heart is
called stroke volume. This is normally 70 ml. The amount of blood pumped by heart per
minute is called cardiac output. It is the product of stroke volume and the number of heart
beats.
Q. 12. Which portal system is present in man ? Write its two advantages.
Ans. Hepatic portal system is present in man. It has the following significance :
(i) The blood which comes from the alimentary canal contains digested food like glucose and
amino acids. The excess of glucose is converted into glycogen which is stored in the liver for
later use. When an individual feels deficiency of food, the glycogen is converted into glucose
and is transferred to the blood stream via hepatic veins.
(ii) Harmful nitrogenous waste like ammonia is converted into urea which is later removed by
kidneys. Thus the blood is detoxified (purified) of harmful nitrogenous waste.
Q. 13. Write a short note on pulmonary circulation.
Ans. (i) The flow of deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle to the lungs and the return of
oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left atrium is called the pulmonary circulation.

(ii) The pulmonary trunk arises from the right ventricle and then divides into the right
pulmonary artery and left pulmonary artery which supply deoxygenated blood to the right
and left lung respectively.
(iii) Exchange of gases takes place in the lungs. Two pulmonary veins from each lung
transport the oxygenated blood to the left atrium.
Q. 14. Define pulse rate. Describe the factors involved in maintaining the pulse
pressure.
Ans. The number of times the heart beats in a minute is known as pulse rate. It has been
observed that the pulse beats at the same rate as the heart beats. Hence the average pulse
rate is 72 beats per minute. The factors involved in maintaining the pulse pressure are as
follows:
(i) The amount of blood in the arteries.
(ii) The cardiac output.
(iii) The elasticity of the arterial walls.
(iv) The viscosity of the blood.

