Short Answer Type Questions-I
Q. 1. Discuss briefly about any one neurotransmitter.
Ans. Acetylcholine:
(i) The neurotransmitter acetylcholine is released at all neuromuscular junctions between
motor neurons and skeleton muscle cell.
(ii) It is also released in synapses between pre-ganglionic and post-ganglionic in the
autonomic nervous system, and at certain synapses between neurons in the central nervous
system.
Q.2. How grey and white matter is distributed in brain?
Ans. (i) In the posterior part of the medulla oblongata, the grey matter is internal and white
mater is external.
(ii) In the anterior part of medulla oblongata grey and white matters are irregularly
intermingled.
(iii) In the remaining part of the brain grey matter is external and white mater is internal.
Q.3. How we are able to sense the changes in our environment?
Ans. We sense the changes in our environment (both internal and external) with the help of
special sensory receptors. These environmental changes, called stimuli, once detected by the
special sensory cells, are conveyed to the brain in the form of nerve impulses. The meaning of
each stimulus is interpreted in the brain and appropriate order is sent to the body parts for its
appropriate response to ensure well being.
Q. 4. Which type of sensory receptor are eyes and ears made up of?
Ans. They are made up of the special sensory receptors called the photoreceptors and the
auditory receptors respectively.
Q. 5. What is the main function of the simple sensory receptors?
Ans. Simple sensory receptors associated with general senses keep the central nervous
system well informed about what is happening, both deep within the body and on its surface.
Q. 6. Explain what do mean by chemoreceptors?
Ans. The receptors for taste and smell are classified as chemoreceptors as these respond to
special chemicals in aqueous solution. In each case, the chemicals must go into solution in
the film of liquid coating the membranes of the receptor cells before these can be detected.
The taste receptors are specialized cells that detect chemicals present in quantity in the
mouth itself, while smell receptors are modified sensory neurons in the nasal passage which
detect the volatile chemicals that get wafted up the nostrils from distant sources. These two
types of receptors complement each other and often respond to the same stimulus.
Q.7. Explain the structural and functional significance of fovea in human eye.

Ans. (i) At the posterior pole of the eye, lateral to the eye blind spot, there is a yellowish
pigmented spot called macula ineta with a shallow depression called the fovea.
(ii) It is a thinned-out portion of the retina that is devoid of rods and blood vessels and has
cones cells only. It is the place of most distinct vision.

