Short Answer Type Questions-II
Q. 1. Where does mitosis take place in plants and animals? What is its significance in
multicellular organisms?.
[KVS Agra 2017]
Ans. It takes place both in somatic and reproductive cells of the plants and animals.
In multicellular organisms, mitosis produces more cells for growth and repair. Mitosis division
is responsible for growth and development of a single-celled zygote into a multicellular
organism. Mitosis division helps in maintaining the proper size. Mitosis also helps in restoring
wear and tear in body tissues, replacing damaged or lost part, healing wounds and regeneration
of detached parts.
Q. 2. Draw a labelled diagram of anaphase of mitosis.
Write any two key features of this phase.

[KVS Sichar 2017]

Ans. Two key features are:
(i) Fibres uniting chromosomes with poles of spindle starts contraction until daughter
chromosomes are completely distinct from one another. Contraction of fibres pulls the groups of
chromosomes further apart to their respective poles.
(ii) The chromosomes move to their poles through
cytoplasm.

Fig. The behaviours of chromosomes at late anaphase n relation to chromosomal, polar
and interzonal spindle fibres
Q. 3. (i) What is meant by cytokinesis?
(ii) How cytokinesis in plants differ from that in animals?

(iii) With reference to the cell types undergoing mitosis differentiate between animal cells and
plant cells.
Ans. (i) Cytokinesis is the cytoplasmic division of a cell at the end of mitosis or meiosis,
which bring about the separation into two daughter cells.
(ii) In animal cell, division of cytoplasm likes by cleavage while in plant cell, division of
cytoplasm takes place by cell-plate formation.
(iii) In plants & new cell wall is fashioned between the new daughter cells, while in animal cells
the cell membrane constricts to pinch the parent cell into daughter cells.
Q. 4. What are the factors controlling cell division?
Ans. Factors controlling cell division are:
(i) Cell size: Cells capable of division attain a particular size and then undergo division.
(ii) Karyoplasmic ratio: Rise in cell volume disturbs karyoplasmic ratio. It stimulates the cell to
divide.
(iii) Mitogens: Mitogens, are agents, factors or substances that trigger cell division.
Q. 5. Differentiate between
(i) S-phase and G2 phase,
(ii) G1 phase and G2 phase.
Ans. (i)
S. NO.

S-phase

G2 phase

(i)

It is called synthetic phase.

It is called pre-mitotic phase.

(ii)

Replication of DNA occurs.

(iii)

It lasts for 6-8 hours.

RNA of all three types and. Proteins for
asters and spindle in it.
It lasts for 2-5 hours.

(ii)
S. No.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

G1 phase

G2 phase

It is called first growth period.
Its duration is variable.
Cells grow in size.

It is Post growth phase.
It lasts for 2-5 hours.
Cell prepares to go into mitotic phase.

Q.6. Define the following : (i) Meiosis, (ii) Amitosis, (iii) G2 phase.
Ans. (i) Meiosis: Meiosis is a double division that takes place in a diploid cell (2N) and involves
reduction of chromosome number to half and forms four haploid cells. It reduces number of
chromosomes to half. So it is popularly termed as the reduction division.

(ii) Amitosis : It is a simple method of cell division, also called direct cell division. In this, there
is no differentiation of chromosomes and spindle. Nuclear envelope does not degenerate.
Nucleus elongates and constricts in middle to form two daughter nuclei. It is followed by a
centripetal constriction of cytoplasm to form 2 daughter cells.
(iii) G2 phase (second growth phase) : It is also called pre-mitotic gap phase. It has double
DNA content as compared to original cell (4C:2C). It produces macromolecules (RNAs,
proteins) for multiplication of organelles, spindle formation and cell growth. G phase prepares
a cell to undergo division.
Q. 7. Explain anaphase of mitosis briefly.

[Imp.]

Ans. Anaphase of Mitosis: (i) It begins by division of centromere.
(ii) Fibres uniting chromosomes with poles of spindle begin contracting until daughter
chromosomes are completely distinct from one another.
(iii) Contraction of fibres pulls the groups of chromosomes further apart to their respective
poles.
(iv) Contraction of fibres and separation of two groups of chromosomes is very rapid.
(v) The chromosomes move to their poles through cytoplasm.
(vi) They assume characteristic V-, J- or I-shaped configuration. The centromere may be in
centre or away from it or may be at terminal end.
For diagram : Refer to SAQ-11/Q.2
Q. 8. How do cytokinesis takes place in plants?
Ans. In plants cytokinesis takes by two methods:
(a) Cleavage method: This method occurs in lower plants. Cytoplasm undergo centripetal
constriction in the middle to form two daughter protoplasts, each having a single nucleus. In
furrow, pectin hemicellulose and microfibrils of cellulose are deposited to form a double wall.
(b) Cell plate method: In this case, the spindle persists for some time, known as phragmoplast.
Small vesicles produced by golgi apparatus collect at the equator of the phragmoplast. The
membrane of vesicles fuse to form film which solidifies to form cell plate.
Q. 9. What is the necessity of meiosis II in meiosis inspite of the reduction division of
meiosis I?
Ans. At the end of Meiosis-I, two groups of chromosomes are produced, with each group
having half the number of chromosomes present in the parent nucleus, therefore meiosis-I is
called reductional division.
But each chromosome is still a dyad i.e., formed of two sister chromatids joined at the common
centromere.
Though the chromosome number has been halved, each chromosome still has double
(2N) amount of DNA. So there is need of meiosis-II during which sister chromatids of

each chromosome separate into different cells. Haploidy occurs even in DNA amount. The main
purpose of meiosis-II is to separate genetically chromosomes formed during crossing over in
meiosis-I.
Q. 10. Explain diakinesis of meiosis I division.
Ans. Diakinesis of meiosis I: (i) The bivalents become condensed to the maximum. These are
evenly distributed throughout nucleus.
(ii) Nucleolus is detached from its chromosomes and disappears.
(iii) The centromeres of bivalents repel each other and the chiasmata move laterally.
(iv) As a result, the paired chromosomes are united only at the ends. This process is known as
the "terminalization".
(v) In big sized chromosomes with many chiasmata terminalization is never complete.
(vi) They remain joined together until metaphase-l Nuclear membrane is broken into pieces and
disappears then.
(vii) Bivalents lie evenly distributed in cytoplasm without overlapping among them.
(viii) For counting the chromosome in sexually reproducing organisms, it seems a best stage of
cell division.
Q.11. Name three events which are responsible for gametic consequence during meiosis.
Ans. Three events responsible for gametic consequences during meiosis are:
(i) The pairing of the homologous chromosomes
(ii) The process of crossing over and recombination, and
(iii) The segregation of homologous chromosomes.

