High Order Thinking Skills (Hots)
Q.1. What makes a species a basic taxonomic category?
Ans. Species consists of one or more individuals that resemble one another more closely than
individuals of other species. The members of a species interbreed freely and are
reproductively isolated from members of other species. These feature make the species a
basic taxonomic category.
Q. 2. If a living organism does not reproduce, in which category will you place it- living
or non-living?
Ans. An organism that does not reproduce, can be placed in a living category. It is because,
reproduction is not necessary for the survival of a living organisms. Many organisms like mule,
sterile worker bees, and infertile human couples are not able to reproduce. But since, they
have all other defining properties of life, so they can be called as living.
Q.3. Paramecium is a living matter while a soil particle is a non-living matter. Explain.
Ans. Paramecium shows various characteristics like growth, metabolism, and response to
stimuli etc., that are specific to living organisms while a soil particle does not show any of
these characteristics. Therefore, it is considered as a non-living matter. Though the soil
particle shows growth, which is also a characteristic of living things, but in this the growth is
only external.
Hence, Paramecium is a living matter while a soil particle is a non-living matter.
Q. 4. What precautions you must take while in a zoological museum?
Ans. (i) Do not touch or displace any specimen or the container containing it.
(ii) Carefully examine each specimen and make notes in a notebook.
(iii) Do not make noise and any kind of disturbance in a museum.
Q.5. Do you consider classification of organisms advantageous?
Ans. Yes, classification of organisms is advantageous.
Some advantages of classifying organisms are as follows:
(i) It helps in identifying an organism.
(ii) It helps in predicting relationship between different species.
(iii) It helps in finding phylogeny of the organisms.
(iv) It helps in studying the fossils.
(v) Because of the classification we can know characteristics of all the members of a taxon by
studying characteristics of one or two organisms the same taxon.

