Long Answer Type Question
Q. 1. Define taxonomy. Briefly explain the processes in Taxonomy.
Ans. The process of classification of all living organisms on the basis of their characteristics is
called taxonomy.
The processes carried out in taxonomy are as follows:
(i) The organism has to be described for its all morphological, anatomical, physiological and
behavioural properties. It is called as characterisation.
(ii) On the basis of its characters, it is decided whether it is similar or different to any known
group of taxa. It is called identification.
(iii) Based on similar characteristics, it is then placed in a known taxa. It is called
classification.
(iv) When the organism is placed in the right taxa, the last step is to determine its name. This
is called as nomenclature.
Q. 2. Why biological classification is useful?
Ans. Biological classification is very useful as it serves the following purposes:
(i) It makes the identification of organisms very clear and easy.
(ii) The study of these organisms is convenient.
(iii) The study of few representatives from each group enables us to have a broad idea of the
life of the whole group.
(iv) It helps to interpret the poor visible structure of the fossil organisms.
(v) It helps to understand the evolutionary trends in various groups of organisms.
Q. 3. What are the guidelines for naming of organisms?
Ans. The guidelines for naming of organisms are:
(i) Each organism is provided a scientific name, consisting of two words, generic and specific.
(ii) The generic name is followed by the specific name. e.g., Homo sapiens.
(iii) The generic name begins with capital letter while specific name begins with small letter.
(iv) These names were taken from Latin and Greek languages.
(v) The names were printed in italics to indicate their Latin origin.
(vi) No two generic names in any kingdom can be the same, but the specific names can be
repeated as they qualify generic name. e.g, Mangifera indica (Mango) and Tamarindus indica
(Tamarind), here indica means 'of India'.

Q.4. Why were most of the earlier botanists and zoologists chiefly taxonomists?
Ans. (i) The earlier botanists and zoologists who wanted to study plants and animals faced
great difficulty in their systematic study, because it is not possible for a person to know and
remember about every plant or an animal individually. Moreover, different species of plants
and animals were known by different names in different parts of the world.
(ii) These two things created great difficulties. In order to overcome these difficulties all the
earlier biologists tried to classify them into various groups, though in the beginning the
attempts to classify them were not on scientific lines. But all were same on the fact that
classification and proper study of organisms were not possible. To overcome this all the
earlier biologists tried to classify living things.
Q. 5. Who proposed Binomial system of nomenclature? Give scientific name of mango.
OR
What is the binomial system of nomenclature? Who proposed this system? Give the
scientific name of Mango.
Ans. Binomial system of Nomenclature:
(i) Naming of plants and animals with two words one generic and the other specific name is
called binomial system of nomenclature.
(ii) Carolus Linnaeus introduced this scientific system to name a species.
(iii) He gave two names to a species: One is generic name while the other is specific name.
(iv) This system of naming species by Linnaeus is called binomial system of nomenclature.
(v) Example Homo sapiens is the scientific name of modern man. The generic name is Homo
while the specific name is sapiens and name of the discoverer is Linnaeus. (Linn) or the name
of the author to describer. Mostly generic names are Latin.
(vi) Linnaeus explained this system in his work Systema Naturae (published in the year 1758).
(vii) Carolus Linnaeus is called Father of Taxonomy or classification.
Scientific name of Mango: Mangifera indica. Generic name is Mangifera, the specific name
is indica.
Q. 6. What are the major divisions of classifications? Classify man. [KVS 2008]
Ans. Major Division of Classification:
(i) Kingdom: It is the highest category in the classification. There are two kingdoms: plantae
and Animalia.
(ii) Phylum: A group of closely related classes having certain common characters.
(iii) Class: A group of closely related orders having certain common characters.
(iv) Order: A group of closely related families having certain common characters.
(v) Family: A group of closely related genera having certain common characters.

(vi) Genus: A group of closely related species having certain common characters.
(vii) Species: Individuals having certain common character plus some characters of their own.
Classification of Man:
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Chordate
Class: Mammalia
Order: Primates
Family: Hominidae
Genus: Homo
Species: sapiens
Q. 7. What are museums? Name some animals and plants which are preserved in
museum.
Ans. Museums: Museums are "collection of dead preserved plants and animals for study and
reference”.
(i) It helps in gathering the first hand information about the habitat, soil and organisms of the
area.
(ii) The museum preserves plants like algae, fungi, mosses, and ferns, parts of gymnosperms
as they cannot be kept in the herbaria.
(iii) Animals specimens are fixed in chemical solution. They are preserved for longer duration.
The specimens are identified and labelled. They are stored and a catalogue is prepared for
future reference. Its objective is to record information and preserve specimens for taxonomic
studies.
(iv) Animals like snakes, fishes, mollusca, insects and others are preserved in museums.
Q. 8. What are zoological parks? Write its significance also.
Ans. Zoological Parks: "It is a place where wild animals are kept in the natural environment"
under human control.
(i) It is also called Zoo or Zoological Garden.
(ii) According to WZCS, they acts as conservation centers. They help us to know about the
wild animals, their food habits, behavior etc.
(iii) People especially the children enjoy the visit by children enjoy the visit by seeing a variety
of animals.
(iv) A scientific purpose of the zoo is to breed the animals (which otherwise are facing thr eat
to their natural habitat).
(v) The information regarding common and scientific names is displayed in the zoological
gardens.
(vi) Some zoological parks are Delhi Zoological Park located near Old Fort in Delhi and
Alipore Zoological Gardens, Kolkata.

Q.9. What do you understand by herbarium? How it is prepared?
Ans. Herbarium is "a collection of plant specimens which have been dried and pressed and
arranged in the sequence of an accepted classifications". It forms a store house for future use.
The preparation of Herbarium involves following steps:
(i) Collection of Specimens: It is a field work. For collection one has to get information about
the area, habitat, season and the time of collection.
There is a requirement of digger for digging roots, scissors for cutting twigs, knife for woody
twigs and a pole with a hook for collection.
(ii) Drying and Pressing: After collection, the plants are dried up by keeping them between
the folds of old newspapers. The plants, after drying, are pressed up by a set of two broad
straps.
(iii) Mounting: The dried specimens are pasted on the herbarium sheets of standard size (29
x 41 cm). The specimens are fixed on the sheets by applying glue or adhesive.
The specimens are sprayed with fungicides like 0.1% solution of mercuric chloride and
pesticides like DDT, naphthalene to check fungal growth and infestations.
(iv) Labelling: Labelling should be done with mounting. It should bear the botanical name,
family, locality, data of collection with the habit of the plant specimen and the collector's name.
(v) Storage: The sheets are arranged according to classification. They are stored in
disinfected metallic cupboards. The information about the collected specimens is compiled
and published in the form of a book.

